REPORT TO THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL BY THE EXPERTS MEETING
ON CYBERSPACE LAW
I. MANDATE AND COMPOSITION OF THE MEETING AND
ORGANISATION OF ITS WORK
1. The Experts Meeting on Cyberspace Law (category VI of the UNESCO regulation on the
classification of meetings) was convened by the Director-General of UNESCO, in
conformity with Resolution 36 adopted by the General Conference at its 29th session, in order
to advise him on the establishment at the international level of an ethical and legal
framework for cyberspace and on the promotion of multilingualism and cultural diversity in
this new environment.
2. Twenty-two experts, designated by the Director-General, participated in their individual
capacity. Eighteen observers from Member States or international organisations participated
as well (see Annex I, List of participants).
3. Mr. Jérôme Huet, Professor at the University of Paris II (France) and President of the review
“Droit de l’informatique et des télécoms” and Mr. Suman Naresh, Professor at Tulane
University School of Law (New Orleans, USA) were designated, respectively, Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson. Ms. Longworth (New Zealand) and Ms. Woo (Korea) were
designated, respectively, Rapporteur and Vice-Rapporteur. Ms. Teresa Fuentes, Division of
Information and Informatics of UNESCO, acted as the Secretary of the Meeting. Mr.
Henrikas Yushkiavitshus, Assistant Director-General for Communication, Information and
Informatics, and Mr. Philippe Quéau, Director of the Division of Information and
Informatics, represented the Director-General.
4. The experts met on 29 and 30 September 1998 at Monte-Carlo (Principality of Monaco).
They were guided in their debates by the Working Document established by the Secretariat
and referenced CII-98/CONF-601.2 (see Annex II). At the close of the meeting, the experts
adopted for consideration by the Director-General a set of principles to be promoted by
UNESCO and a number of activities to be undertaken by the Organization.
II. PRINCIPLES AND ACTIONS PROPOSED BY THE EXPERTS
The Experts Meeting on Cyberspace Law:
1. Recognising the interest of UNESCO in the promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in cyberspace particularly in the fields of education, science and culture;
2. Recognising the mandate and the ethical and intellectual mission of UNESCO, its
universal vocation and the transdisciplinary character of its fields of competence;
3. Recognising that current international discussions concerning cyberspace activities and
digital works tend to emphasise economic matters rather than social and cultural
interests;
4. Recognising that the global nature of the Internet raises issues of common concern for
governments and peoples around the world;
5. Recognising the need to work in cooperation with other international organisations
concerned with matters of cyberspace law and the need for international efforts on
harmonisation and to resolve jurisdictional issues;
6. Recognising the open and decentralised character of "cyberspace" as well as its
interactive and dynamic nature, system of electronic linkages, and the irrelevance of
geographic and physical boundaries;
7. Recognising that cyberspace offers benefits and opportunities as well as undesirable
consequences that raise complex issues for humanity.
A. Principles to be promoted by UNESCO:
The Experts Meeting on Cyberspace Law proposes to the Director-General that UNESCO
promote the following principles:
1. Communication Principle:
•= The right of communication is a fundamental human right.
2. Participation Principle:
•= Every citizen should have the right to meaningful participation in the information
society.
The above key principles embody the concept of every person’s right to access the new
environment of cyberspace, in particular:
3. Universal Service Principle:
•= States should promote universal services where, to the extent possible given the
different national and regional circumstances and resources, the new media shall be
accessible at community level by all individuals, on a non-discriminatory basis
regardless of geographic location.
4. Multiculturalism and Multilingualism Principle:
•= States and users should promote cultural and linguistic diversity in cyberspace by the
promotion of regional and local participation in Internet activities, information
collections, and new information services.
5. Ethics Principle:
•= States and users should promote efforts, at the local and international levels, to
develop ethical guidelines for participation in the new cyberspace environment.
6. Education Principle:
•= All persons should have a right to appropriate education in order to read, write and
work in cyberspace. There should be specific initiatives to educate parents, children,
teachers and other Internet users on the implications of their participation in
cyberspace and on how to maximise the opportunities presented by the new media.
7. Free Expression Principle:
•= States should promote the right to free expression and the right to receive
information regardless of frontiers.
8. Privacy and Encryption Principles:
•= The fundamental right of individuals to privacy, including secrecy of communication
and protection of personal data, should be respected in national law and in the
implementation and use of technical methods as well as private legal remedies and
other self-regulatory measures.
9. Access to Information Principle:
•= Public bodies should have an affirmative responsibility to make public information
widely available on the Internet and to ensure the accuracy and timeliness of the
information. This information could include government information, information
concerning cultural heritage, and archival and historical information.
•= The traditional balance between the rights of authors and limitations on these rights,
including the free use of ideas in published works, should be maintained in
cyberspace in the interests of the public and of the authors.
•= States should preserve and expand the public domain in cyberspace.
10. Training Principle:
•= Job training in electronic media should be encouraged to enable people to
communicate in the new media and to create new opportunities in employment.
11. International Co-operation Principle:
•= States shall co-operate at an international level and seek to harmonise national law
to resolve jurisdictional or conflict of laws differences.
B. Activities to be undertaken by UNESCO:
The Experts Meeting on Cyberspace Law Proposes to the Director-General that UNESCO
undertake, inter alia, the following activities:
1. Pursue the on-going publication of the collective work on the “International
Dimensions of Cyberspace Law”.
2. Study the application to cyberspace of each article of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
3. Conduct an empirical study of the realities, significance and consequences of all
barriers to access, whether publicly or privately created, and in particular an
investigation of barriers to access, such as:
•= The blocking of information and transactions due to practices of blacklisting
and barring from discussion groups.
•= The use of filtering devices.
•= The requirements of standardisation which may preclude information in nonstandardised
forms.
4. Assess the adequacy of translation software and take steps to increase the availability
and the development of improved versions.
5. Promote specific initiatives for the education of parents, children, teachers and other
Internet users on reading, writing and working in cyberspace, on the implications of
participation in cyberspace, and on the maximisation of the positive benefits
presented by the technologies.
6. Represent, in international debates on intellectual property law, all interests
concerned with the need to expand the public domain.
7. Conduct an independent study of the actual economic cost of piracy on the Internet
and the degree to which the resulting disincentive has reduced the supply of works
desired by the public.
8. Study the significance of jurisdictional issues and conflicts of law and promote
harmonisation of national laws.
C. Task forces and advisory committee to be established by UNESCO:
Invites the Director-General, for undertaking these activities, to:
9. Establish a small Group of Experts designated by the Director-General and acting on
their own capacity, on the basis of two from each region and one from each
international organisation directly concerned, to propose and monitor the activities to
be conducted by UNESCO in the area of cyberspace law.
10. Establish global and regional study groups or task forces to carry out or commission
the studies in these recommendations.