Proposed Internet Governance Principles
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Walid Al-Saqaf
Region: Yemen
Organization: ISOC-Yemen
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: Free Secure Safe Robust Internet
Abstract
We present a set of proposals that we find crucial to maximize the benefit of the Internet 
for humanity at large and to remain as robust, secure, and free as possible for 
generations to come.
Document
February 19, 2014
 
ISOC-Yemen welcomes the opportunity to participate in the Global Multistakeholder 
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance. As a [discussion nature of organization 
and interest in the multistakeholder model], [organization or organization’s members] rely 
on an open, stable, secure, resilient, and interoperable Internet every day. We believe 
that preserving the multistakeholder model of Internet governance is essential to ensuring 
that global citizens are able to take advantage of this transformative platform both now 
and in the future.
 
Below we highlight some high level principles for Internet governance going forward. We 
believe that these principles will both allow the global Internet community to preserve the 
open Internet for the billions who currently rely on it in their daily lives, and bring its advantages to the 5 billion people who are presently unconnected.
 
Substantive Principles: Any Model of Internet Governance Should Promote the Following 
Principles.
 
? The world deserves the access to knowledge, services, commerce, and communication, 
the accompanying benefits to economic development, education, and health care, and the 
informed discussion that the Internet provides. Governance should promote expanding 
access to broadband networks so that these benefits can reach all of the world’s citizens.
? The Internet’s importance as a platform for commerce, for education, for information and 
knowledge sharing, for self-expression, and for organization and assembly, depends on 
the global free flow of information. Any model for governance must promote this free flow 
of information.
? Governance should promote the ability to innovate, to develop technical capacity, and to 
create and take advantage of economic opportunities. To achieve this end, any model of 
Internet governance must promote the open, distributed, interoperable, and 
interconnected nature of the Internet.
? Because the Internet is an integral part of the global economy, its security, stability, and 
resiliency must be preserved.
? Individuals should be able to exercise their human rights, both online and offline.
? Governments should recognize limitations on their ability to collect information on 
Internet users based on users’ reasonable privacy interests and the impact on trust in the 
Internet.
 
Governance Principles: Any Model of Internet Governance Should Have the Following 
Characteristics.
 
? All stakeholders -- individual users, governments, civil society, businesses, and 
members of the academic and technical community -- have a stake in preserving the 
Internet as a critical platform for communication and information exchange, and therefore 
all stakeholders should be included in governance decisions. All of these stakeholders 
have contributed to the development of the Internet to date, and working together, they 
have driven unprecedented growth in access to, uses of, and innovation on the Internet. They must continue to be involved in any future model of Internet governance.
? Any policy-making associated with the Internet must promote openness, transparency, 
and accountability, and must be grounded in respect for the rule of law.
 
 
Walid Al-Saqaf
President
ISOC-Yemen