U.S. Government Submission for NETmundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND 
ROADMAP
Entitled by: U.S. Department of State
Region: United States
Organization: U.S. Government
Sector: Government
Keywords: USA government multistakeholderism human-rights access 
stability security interoperability functionality innovation 
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
The Government of the United States of America appreciates the opportunity to 
participate in the ?Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet 
Governance,? or NETmundial. We commend the effort of the Brazilian government in 
coordination and consultation with the global Internet community to convene this meeting. 
We look forward to participating in meaningful discussions that generate support for the 
evolving multistakeholder framework for the future of Internet governance.
Document
 
U.S. Government Submission for NETmundial
 
The Government of the United States of America appreciates the opportunity to 
participate in the “Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet 
Governance,” or NETmundial. We commend the effort of the Brazilian government in 
coordination and consultation with the global Internet community to convene this meeting. 
We look forward to participating in meaningful discussions that generate support for the evolving multistakeholder framework for the future of Internet governance.
 
The United States Government submits the following contribution in response to the 
request for views on two topics: 
 
1.
“Internet governance principles,” and 
2.
“A roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem.”
 
 
 
Internet Governance Principles
 
 
 
We understand that the meeting organizers would like participants to reach agreement on 
Internet governance principles. Achieving consensus on such a set of principles will 
require flexibility, a fair process, and cooperation. Our primary goal is to work with all 
stakeholders to achieve shared support for multistakeholder Internet governance. 
 
 
 
There is precedent for this effort, as other conferences, organizations, nations, and 
individuals have previously compiled high level principles on Internet governance. 
Accordingly, we submit that a good starting point for discussions would be the 
consideration of principles that are common among these existing efforts and have 
already garnered widespread or universal support.  
 
 
Based on our review of, and participation in, the formulation of various sets of principles, 
we note that many of these efforts include the following goals for Internet governance and 
policymaking:
 
 
 
1.
Commitment to the multistakeholder approach, with processes rooted in democratic 
values, involving the participation of all interested stakeholders, and occurring in a 
transparent manner.
2.
Protection of human rights, which apply online just as they do offline.
3.
Promotion of universal and non-discriminatory access to the Internet.
4.
Promotion of the stability, security, interoperability, and functionality of the network.
5.
Promotion of standard setting, regulatory, and legal environments that support 
innovation and avoid unnecessary duplication.
 
 
 
These principles appear in previous works that the U.S. has supported, including the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) Council 
Recommendations on Principles for Internet Policymaking, the founding declaration for 
the Freedom Online Coalition, and the Deauville G8 declaration. These goals are also the 
basis for many independent sets of principles, notably including the Brazilian Internet 
Steering Committee’s (CGI.br) principles and the United States’ International Strategy for 
Cyberspace, as well as many other documents from civil society and other stakeholders. We welcome the consideration of additional similar common principles.
 
 
 
We believe it is wise to avoid excessive deliberation on issues known to divide 
participants beyond a distance that can reasonably be bridged in two days. For example, 
we would discourage meeting participants from debating the reach or limitations of state 
sovereignty in Internet policy. We are optimistic that NETmundial can meaningfully 
contribute to the development of Internet governance principles by focusing on those 
topics that enjoy broad support.
 
 
 
A roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet Governance ecosystem
 
 
 
The High Level Panel on Global Internet Cooperation and Governance Mechanisms is 
currently convening to review the multistakeholder system of Internet governance and 
propose recommendations for future growth and evolution. We understand that the panel 
will construct proposals for discussion during NETmundial. We look forward to considering 
these proposals and we appreciate the other multistakeholder efforts to explore 
opportunities for positive, inclusive evolution and cooperative problem solving.
 
Ultimately, the Internet’s global multistakeholder community should work cooperatively on 
continuing to improve and evolve the Internet governance ecosystem. The more open and 
inclusive the approach, the greater the legitimacy the system will have. 
 
  
The United States government believes that existing multistakeholder institutions deserve 
significant credit for the Internet’s global growth and dynamism and should remain the 
cornerstones of the Internet governance ecosystem. Multistakeholder organizations 
should continue to evolve alongside changing technologies and stakeholder needs and to 
address all relevant opportunities and challenges. Governments should participate 
meaningfully in this system, and may also play an enabling or facilitating role to help the 
multistakeholder system to function well. Finally, governments should ensure that the 
proper incentives and environment are in place domestically so that a single, 
interoperable Internet can flourish globally, enabling freedom of expression and economic 
prosperity.
 