Proposed Internet Governance Principles
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Hago Dafalla
Region: Sudan, Africa
Organization: University of Gezira, Wad Medani, Sudan
Sector: Academia
Keywords: Freedom,Transparency, Equality,Openness
Abstract
The University of Gezira would like to propose some basic principles regarding in the
internet Governance. This set of proposal are very important to raise the issue Internet
Governance in the world, especially in the third world, that the internet is for all in equal
bases in transparency, security and Accessibility to all multi-stakeholder in the world.
Document
The Meeting which shall be held in Sao Paulo, must offers some of basic principles to
build good environment for Internet Governance for all stakeholder in the world taking in
Consideration the freedom for expression, opinion and equal of the accessibility for all
stakeholder. When she addressed the United Nations General Assembly on 24
September 2013, Dilma Rousseff, President of Brazil, reminded us that “In the absence of
the right to privacy, there can be no true freedom of expression and opinion and therefore
no effective democracy” .
Therefore, the human right for all people in the internet must be protected and secure, so
that everyone can feeling secure and able to express about his opinion in easy way.
It’s very important for the Democratically in the third world to find the right way to forward ,
so it need help, because it’s in the early stage of freedom and democracy.
Below is my principles:
1 - Freedom of expression, privacy, security of the individual and respect for human
rights, equality in judgment and respect the nationality of the people.
2 - respect for human values ??and the general guideline principles of citizenship and
ethnic diversity and the advancement of society to achieve prosperity and a decent living .
3 - provide opportunities for training , education, transparency and equality among
peoples of the world of non- discrimination in terms of gender or race.
4 - do not block the Internet or restricting the conscious country in the world under the
pretext of the economic sanctions imposed by developed countries that limit development
and scientific progress using the Internet , which has become an effective tool in the
development of the country.
5 - Governments must not put restrictions on the creativity of its citizens were estimated
and non- discrimination and gather information that will limit the number of Internet users
on the basis of the privacy interests of the state and the impact on confidence in the
security of the internet.
6 - on all States to establish laws to protect the children from the dangers of internet and
trafficking in human beings and that must be a deterrent .
7 - Freedom of the electronic press is part of the human rights and should be protected by
the governments and governments of developing countries need to protect freedom of the
press, bloggers and websites. must promote openness, transparency , accountability
and should be based on respect for the rule of law in the country.
8 - Do not involve politics in the work of organizations and management of the Internet
and control them in any argument which is contrary to the rules and Principles of human
rights and international conventions.
9 - Make the Internet for all, a safe place and open accommodate everyone without
exception.