Submission by Government of Sweden on Internet
Governance Principles
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Government of Sweden
Region: Sweden
Organization: Government of Sweden
Sector: Government
Keywords: Empowerment of Internet users; Universality of the Internet;
Security of the Internet; Architectural principles; Open Internet;
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Our core message: we must safeguard a free, open and secure internet and the
globalmulti-stakeholder model for internet governance.A global agreement on the
following core issues are intended to safeguard the open and secure internet,
characterised by freedom and innovation without restrictions, continuously developing
through a global multi-stakeholder model for internet governance, with the purpose to
ensure continued productivity and global economic growth, social prosperity and benefits
for all.
Document
Human rights and the rule of law
The same rights that people have offline must also be protected online.
Freedom of expression is a cornerstone in a democratic society and its full enjoyment on
the Internet is of paramount importance. The right to share opinions on the Internet forms
an essential part in increasing individuals’ ability for effective participation in public as well
as private discourse.
Internet governance arrangements must ensure the protection of all fundamental rights
and freedoms and affirm their universality, indivisibility, interdependence and interrelation
in accordance with international human rights law. They must also ensure full respect for
democracy and the rule of law and should promote sustainable development. All public
and private actors should recognise and uphold human rights and fundamental freedoms
in their operations and activities, as well as in the design of new technologies, services
and applications. They should be aware of developments leading to the enhancement of,
as well as threats to, fundamental rights and freedoms, and fully participate in efforts
aimed at recognising newly emerging rights.
The rule of law must be the foundation for legislation and normative development for all
conduct online. States must ensure full compliance with their obligations under
international law.
Government surveillance of electronic communication must be carried out with respect for
human rights at all times and in line with a body of fundamental principles including
legality, legitimate aim, necessity, proportionality, judicial authority, transparency and
public oversight.
Multi-stakeholder governance
The development and implementation of Internet governance arrangements should
ensure, in an open, transparent and accountable manner, the full participation of users,
civil society, the private sector, the technical community and governments. The
development of international Internet-related public policies and Internet governance
arrangements should enable full and equal participation of all stakeholders from all
countries.
Responsibilities of states
States have rights and responsibilities with regard to international Internet-related public
policy issues. In the exercise of their sovereignty rights, states should, subject to
international law, refrain from any action that would directly or indirectly harm persons or
entities outside of their territorial jurisdiction. Furthermore, any national decision or action
amounting to a restriction of fundamental rights should comply with all obligations in
international law and in particular be based on law, be necessary in a democratic society
and fully respect the principles of proportionality and the right of independent appeal and
surrounded by appropriate legal and due process safeguards.
Empowerment of Internet users
Users should be fully empowered to exercise their fundamental rights and freedoms,
make informed decisions and participate in Internet governance arrangements, in
particular in governance mechanisms and in the development of Internet-related public
policy, in full confidence and freedom.
Universality of the Internet
Internet-related policies should recognise the global nature of the Internet and the
objective of universal access. Policies should not adversely affect the unimpeded flow of
transboundary Internet traffic.
Security of the Internet
The security, stability, robustness and resilience of the Internet as well as its ability to
evolve should be the key objectives of Internet governance. In order to preserve the
integrity and ongoing functioning of the Internet infrastructure, as well as users’ trust and
reliance on the Internet, it is necessary to promote national and international multistakeholder
co-operation.
Security concerns must be addressed from a growth- and freedom-oriented, participative,
bottom-up perspective that has human rights at its core. Security and freedom should be
seen as mutually reinforcing concepts, not as a balancing act.
Decentralised management
The technical community as well as the private sector should retain their leading role in
the day-to-day management of technical and operational matters in the management of
the Internet, decentralised in character.
Architectural principles
The open standards and the interoperability of the Internet as well as its end-to-end
nature should be preserved. These principles should guide all stakeholders in their
decisions related to Internet governance. There should be no unreasonable barriers to
entry for new users or legitimate uses of the Internet, or unnecessary burdens which could
affect the potential for innovation in respect of technologies and services.
Open Internet
Users should have the greatest possible access to Internet-based content, applications
and services of their choice, whether or not they are offered free of charge, using suitable
devices of their choice. Traffic management measures which have an impact on the
enjoyment of fundamental rights and freedoms, in particular the right to freedom of
expression and to impart and receive information regardless of frontiers, as well as the
right to respect for private life, must meet the requirements of international law on the
protection of freedom of expression and access to information, and the right to respect for
private life.
Cultural and linguistic diversity
Preserving cultural and linguistic diversity and fostering the development of local content,
regardless of language or script, should be key objectives of Internet-related policy and
international co-operation, as well as in the development of new technologies.