The Information Security Forum's Threat Horizon 2015
Report - More danger from known threats
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: William Beer
Region: Brazil
Organization: Alvarez & Marsal (Information Security Forum Agent for
Brazil)
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Cyber, Risk, Governance, Threats
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 2
Abstract
The Information Security Forum (ISF) is the world's leading authority on information risk
management. A not-for-profit organisation, that supplies authoritative opinion & guidance
on all aspects of information security. The annual ISF Threat Horizon report provides a
practical way for organisations to take a forward-looking view of the increasing threats in
today?s always-on, interconnected world. This in turn enables a better prepared, strategic
approach to managing and mitigating risk. Understanding threats is fundamental to
enterprise risk management; threats need to be evaluated in the context of the
organisation to determine risk. The ISF?s 2015 Threat Horizon report finds that the
biggest risk is from known threats. The fact that hacktivism and malicious software have
been around for sometime doesn?t mean they?re less threatening and we can relax -
quite the opposite.
Document
Understanding threats is fundamental to enterprise risk management; threats need to be
evaluated in thecontext of the organisation on to determine risk.
This year’s Threat Horizon report fi nds that the biggest risk is from known threats. The
fact that hacktivism and malicious software have been around for some it me doesn’t
mean they’re less threatening and we can relax – quite the opposite. Known threats,
because they’ve matured, are more dangerous and pose more risk to our organisation
ons than ever. They’re more sophisticated and more effective. Whether they’re old or new
is much less important than their potential to do harm.
The annual ISF Threat Horizon report provides a practice cal way for organisations to take
a forward-looking view of the increasing threats in today’s always-on, interconnected
world. This in turn enables a better prepared, strategic approach to managing and
mitigating risk.
This year’s report deals with the following themes:
• Cyber risk is challenging to understand and address, from CEOs that simply don’t get it
to organisati ons struggling to fi nd the right people.
• Reputation is a new target for cyber attacks, from insider activists who leak information,
and hackativist collectives who vote on who they dislike this week
• Criminals value your information, they’re highly motivated to obtain it, or to use what
leaks out of your organisation
• The changing pace of technology doesn’t help; bring your own cloud (BYOC) and bring
your own device (BYOD) also bring their own risks
• The role of governments must not be misunderstood: while they have a key role to play,
they won’t lead cyber security eff orts – they expect organisations to manage risks in
cyberspace and prevent information and systems from being compromised
ISF Threat Horizon reports are written for a non-technical audience, and ISF Members
use them for many purposes, for example as a communications and awareness tool, to
align business and security strategy, and to influence their organisation’s risk appettite.
This report contains recommendations and references to ISF influence on s
te.deliverables and other external resources which can helpaddress these risks.