Internet governance principles and human rights
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Matthew Shears
Region: Global
Organization: Best Bits
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords:
Abstract
This is a joint submission authored by participants in the Best Bits civil society network,
and endorsed by the individuals and organisations listed at http://bestbits.net/netmundialprinciples/.
It is the first of three such joint submissions put forward through the Best Bits
platform.
Document
The undersigned civil society organisations and individuals are pleased to contribute the
following submission to the discussion of Internet governance principles at the April 2014
Brazil NETmundial meeting.
We are pleased to note the NETmundial organisers’ clear focus on human rights,
particularly as this submission specifically addresses the imperative of adopting a human
rights based approach to Internet governance, both in terms of 1) providing a framing for
Internet governance policy discussions, deliberations and decision-making generally, and
2) providing principles-based underpinnings to the governance processes and
participation mechanisms themselves.
The fundamental importance of human rights to Internet governance is broadly
understood and accepted but does necessitate further elaboration and greater
commitment from all stakeholders – it is all too easy to state that policies and mechanisms
are human rights respecting, but lip-service is not enough. Human rights must be core to
Internet governance and we must be explicit in terms of what that actually means.
This submission links to two sets of existing and recognized principles that directly
address human rights and the Internet:
The Internet Rights and Principles Coalition Charter of human rights and
principles for the Internet (IRP Charter)
And, the Association for Progressive Communications (APC) Internet
Rights Charter
The Internet is an enabler and catalyst of human rights. As is stated in APC’s Charter the
“ability to share information and communicate freely using the internet is vital to the
realisation of human rights as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(1948), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1976), the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1976) and the Convention of the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW, 1980).”
The Internet can only be a catalyst of human rights if the principles that frame and
underpin the governance of the Internet are based on human rights. The importance of
human rights based Internet governance is clearly stated in the IRP Charter of Human
Rights and Principles for the Internet: “The Internet and the communications system must
be governed in such a way as to ensure that it upholds and expands human rights to the
fullest extent possible.”
Both the IRP Charter and the APC Charter look specifically at the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR) and elaborate on how its articles relate to the Internet and its use
and governance. For example, both Charters look at Article 12 of the UDHR on the right
to privacy and elaborate on what that means for the Internet, including the importance of
national legal frameworks that are in line with human rights, the right to communicate
anonymously and to use encryption technologies, and the right to communicate free from
the threat of arbitrary surveillance and interception.
We believe that any discussion of Internet principles or policies must be guided by,
consistent with and respectful of human rights and the APC and IRP Charters provide a
clear and unequivocal assertion of that imperative.
The importance of human rights or a human rights framing to Internet governance is
supported by a diversity of Internet (governance and policy) principles from a diversity of
stakeholder groupings, including, among others, the following:
2011 Council of Europe Declaration by the Committee of Ministers on
Internet governance principles: Principle 1 – Human rights, democracy
and the rule of law
2009 CGI.br Principles for the governance and use of the Internet:
Principle 1 – Freedom, privacy and human rights
2011 G8 Deauville Declaration – Renewed Commitment for Freedom and
Democracy: Paras 5, II.5, II.9 and II.13
Internet governance is also dependent upon the realisation and safeguarding of human
rights: the freedoms of expression and association are essential to participatory and
inclusive governance processes – without the realisation of these rights it is quite possible
that such governance processes would not exist. While the Internet is a catalyst or
enabler of rights, it is also dependent upon a rights-based governance model for it to
thrive and for its users to be empowered.
Internet governance comprises a range of process and participation mechanisms that
aspire to be characterized by openness, transparency, inclusivity and accountability,
among others. These characteristics correlate broadly to existing human rights, and in
particular those enumerated in Articles 18, 19, 20 and 21 of the UDHR (and 18, 19, 22
and 25 of the ICCPR). These characteristics are central to rights-based governance –
among others, they support individuals and communities voicing their opinions and
concerns, encourage participation by all interested stakeholders on an equal footing, allow
for transparent and open decision-making processes, and ensure stakeholders are
accountable to their communities and for the decisions they take.
These governance characteristics are further elaborated on in
APC’s Charter Theme 6 on the “Governance of the Internet,” which calls
for the full involvement of all stakeholders in Internet governance,
transparency and accessibility, a decentralized, collaborative and
interoperable Internet, open architecture and open standards, among
others; and,
IRPC’s Charter Principle 19 on the “Right to Appropriate Social and
International Order for the Internet,” which calls for governance that
upholds and expands human rights, multilingualism and pluralism on the
Internet, and the right of everyone to participate in the governance of the
Internet, among others.
They are also highlighted in the CGI.br’s second principle entitled “Democratic and
collaborative governance.” These same principles also characterize the multi-stakeholder
model, as in the Council of Europe’s second principle entitled “multi-stakeholder
governance” and para 20 of the G8 Deauville Declaration (documents mentioned above).
We believe that these key governance characteristics – openness, transparency,
inclusivity, accountability, and equitable multistakeholder participation among others –
should form the basis of a set of process and participation principles for Internet
governance that should be an output of the NETmundial meeting. They would then frame
and provide a common understanding of the ways in which Internet governance
discussions, deliberations and decision-making would occur. (A separate submission to
the NETmundial meeting on the evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem
addresses these characteristics in more detail.)
We strongly believe that the NETmundial meeting should reaffirm the importance of
human rights to both 1) Internet governance more broadly (and any associated principles
or roadmap for the evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem) and 2) the processes
and participation mechanisms that underpin Internet governance.
We trust that this contribution and the linked sets of principles will form a central element
in the discussions on Internet governance principles.