Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet
Governance Ecosystem ? institutional mechanisms
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Andrew Puddephatt
Region: Global
Organization: Best Bits
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords:
Abstract
While there are multiple forums where issues pertaining to internet governance are being
addressed, these forums do not all adequately fulfill basic procedural criteria, such as
transparency, effectiveness, accountability and open participation. As a result,
development issues have not been adequately tackled and some fundamental human
rights are under threat. This submission intends to propose a model that improves existing
institutions, maintaining a distributed, coordinated, system of internet governance.
Document
Draft roadmap for the further evolution of the internet
governance ecosystem
Shortcomings of the current internet governance ecosystem
1. Certain issues that are not adequately addressed in the current system
A variety of internet-related public policy issues are not being adequately addressed in the
current internet governance ecosystem. A non-exhaustive list of pressing substantive
issues that we, the undersigned members of civil society, believe are not being
adequately addressed and that have important global dimensions include:
Universal and affordable high-quality access
Protection of the right of freedom of expression
Protection of the right to privacy
Protection of net neutrality
Access to knowledge
Enhancing cultural and linguistic diversity
Cross-border information flow and jurisdiction
2. Institutional shortcomings of the current system
Institutional shortcomings in the current internet governance ecosystem are at the heart of
the existing structural failures to address the substantive issues we list above. In our view,
these are:
Lack of multi-stakeholder decision-making forums to address certain
internet-related public policy issues: decisions that affect all stakeholders
are being made on an ad hoc or arbitrary basis both by governments and
the private sector, without proper multistakeholder processes, in a way
that impacts the rights of users and encroaches on the global and
distributed functioning of the internet.
Lack of clarity and coordination between existing forums: While there are
multiple forums where issues pertaining to internet governance have been
addressed, there is a lack of clarity about how and where decisions are
made.
Imbalance of power in existing forums: Many people and groups, in
particular from the global south, are marginalised from decision-making
processes. There is also insufficient diversity of voices, including with
regards to gender and language diversity.
Digital development agenda as set out during WSIS has failed to fully
deliver: The international digital development framework as set out in the
Tunis Agenda and the WSIS Action Lines[1] is seen to have done little to
address development concerns and the digital divide which remains a
pressing issue.
Guiding Principles for Evolving the Internet Governance Ecosystem
We consider the following mutually-supporting criteria to be necessary for the further
evolution of the internet governance ecosystem:
a) Underlying Values
Protection and promotion of Human Rights should be at the core of any
governance process and outcomes, guided by international human rights
legal frameworks as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, (UDHR), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights ICESCR)[2].
Preservation of the global nature of the internet should be at the core of
any internet governance processes. Maintaining and advancing the
interoperable, decentralized, open and global nature of the internet should
be a priority over the short-term interest of any particular stakeholder
group.
Operationalization of multistakeholder approaches to governance
processes, recognizing that the role of different stakeholder varies
according to the issue, venue, and status of discussion. Sections b) and c)
below provide minimum guidelines.
b) Decision making processes
Transparent and comprehensible: it should be possible for anyone to
understand how Internet Governance related decision making processes
work in the various fora and how decisions are made. Institutions should
pro-actively publish data, information and documents in accessible formats
in a timely manner.
Accountable: internal and external accountability processes should exist,
including a way of challenging decisions;
Effective: decisions should be enforceable and meet the policy goals they
were meant to tackle;
Adaptable: able to take account of new innovations and developments in
the field, and also be able to accommodate new voices.
c) Participation
Inclusive and open: not limited to a small exclusive club, but open to
many, with all necessary points of view included in order to reach good
decisions/agreements;
Informed: possessing the necessary expertise to make decisions,
including reflecting all different geographic regions;
Meaningful participation: anybody affected by a decision should be able to
impact upon decision-making processes. Ensuring gender and regional
balance and the inclusion of marginalized voices are particularly important.
Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance
Ecosystem[3]
We outline below a proposal to address the shortcomings of the current system that are
consistent with the list of criteria highlighted above. These arrangements seek to improve
the existing internet governance ecosystem, developing and maintaining a distributed,
coordinated, multistakeholder system of internet governance. The gradual implementation
of this proposal provides a roadmap for the evolution of the Internet Governance
Ecosystem.
While a centralised system might be easier to navigate, a distributed system guided by
the principles outlined earlier in this submission addresses far more effectively the
shortcomings listed above. The internet is not an fixed issue but an evolving space.
Therefore it is a mistake to think that one body, and one set of experts, could possibly be
responsible for effective policy making on all Internet-related matters. Rather, a distributed
system better enables issue-based expertise, including from civil society from around the
world, to engage on specific issues. Therefore the proposals below seek to address the
weaknesses and gaps in the current system by strengthening, coordinating and improving
the existing distributed system of internet governance.
1. A new co-ordinating function
In response to the shortcomings underlined above, we propose a new coordinating
mechanism, consistent with paragraph 37 of the Tunis Agenda, to facilitate the coherence
and effectiveness of existing internet-related policy making mechanisms within a
distributed model.
This coordination mechanism, should include all stakeholders and build on work already
done (including within the Correspondence Group of the Working Group on Enhanced
Cooperation) to seek, compile, review, research and analyze inputs on progress and gaps
in international Internet related public policy. Based on this work, it shall also recommend
the most appropriate venue or venues to develop further policy as required.
It could [be newly established or] attached to an existing multistakeholder body such the
IGF (per paragraph 72 b of the Tunis Agenda), to the UN Commission on Science and
Technology for Development (CSTD), or to any comparable venue consistent with the
guiding principles outlined earlier in this submission.
2. Issue-specific multistakeholder working groups
For some specific issues[4] that are not being adequately addressed in the current
framework we propose that these should be resolved through ad hoc multi-stakeholder
working groups developed on a case by case basis, bringing together relevant actors. The
above-mentioned co-ordinating function would aid stakeholders in identifying gaps in the
current framework so that ad hoc working groups would only be formed when there is an
actual need and help forge collaboration between existing institutions and disband once
the issue is addressed.
These groups could, but not necessarily, work within the IGF framework or through
flexible, open and inclusive processes and that are consistent with the guiding principles
outlined above. Innovative methodologies of broad consultation and participation could be
looked into as alternatives when necessary.
3. Broad participation & role of reformed IGF
While the coordination function can be responsible for designating the venue or venues
where issues that are not adequately addressed will be taken forward, the IGF should
continue to function as a platform where ongoing policy processes and their outcomes are
presented and can receive feedback from a wider audience.
The lGF process of the last five years has enriched our understanding of internet public
policy issues, actors, spaces and challenges. Therefore, we view a reformed IGF that, at
minimum implements the recommendations of the Working Group on IGF Improvements,
as playing a central role for a space where problems are framed and principles are
developed. In addition to the recommendations of that report, we also point to a series of
concrete recommendations previously proposed by members of civil society, including
new approaches to IGF themes, session formats, reforming the Multistakeholder Advisory
Group (MAG), funding and online deliberation mechanisms.[5].
[1] http://www.itu.int/wsis/implementation/
[2] A comprehensive list of these values was developed and posted under the topic set of
internet governance principles of this consultation.
[3] Note: Reform of ICANN will be addressed in another submission.
[4] Additional comments can be found in Questionnaire response to CSTD Working Group
on Enhanced Cooperation.
[5] Additional comments can be found in Submission to IGF on themes and formats for
the 2014 meeting.