A roadmap Topics: Cybercrime, children, the youth and
Special Needs
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Hago Dafalla
Region: Sudan, Africa
Organization: University of Gezira, Wad Medani, Sudan
Sector: Academia
Keywords: Cybercrime, youth,children
Abstract
The University of Gezira, Sudan appreciates the role of the President of Brazil for
establish the ?Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance",
and I am happy to proposed this proposal on behalf of University of Gezira, so that the
University of Gezira, Sudan that can participate in this meeting. We look forward to
participating in meaningful discussions that generate support for the evolving
multistakeholder framework for the future of Internet governance in management
transparency and freedom of the Internet to achieve the objectives of citizens to live
happily and well-being and equal in rights and duties in the world.
Document
The University of Gezira submits the following contribution a roadmap Topics:
Cybercrime, children, the youth and Special Needs .
Over time, increases cybercrime and multiplied its forms not only to break into networks
and steal information or sabotage them only, but also appeared moral crimes such as
kidnapping, extortion , murder and others.
In light of the tremendous advances of information technology , and because of the sheer
number of individuals and institutions who attend this network , it has become easy to
commit the most heinous crimes against their visitors, whether they are individuals or
institutions or entire communities of the province.
This prompted many organizations and bodies to launch calls and warnings of the danger
of this phenomenon that threatens all Internet users where it became easier means in
front of the perpetrators of the crime , so he went criminals who violate the symptoms, and
control of the children easily, in addition to committing the crimes of libel and defamation
through websites dedicated to this goal.
The internet crime is become very dangerous for Continuity of internet and it's effect in the
trade, education, telecommunications in risk. The cyber attacked made the internet very
dangerous place for communications. so we need safe internet environment, without any
kind of threat which it will effect negatively for international trade and exchange of
transfer of the money in the world. Another kind of the internet crime which is crime
against children (is very important crime), because children is the future of the world, and
any country need good children, well-educated and ready to develop his country which is
reflected positive to his country especially and generally to the world . so we need to
protect them from this kind of crime. We need to establish Legislation and laws consistent
with the Child Rights Act, which was approved by the UN.
The most important issues is to enable young people (Youth) to use the mechanics of the
Internet so that they can express their views without fear or terror or control and criminal
prosecution , prompting the development and advancement of the country as the young
people (youth) are the fuel in the home construction and sustainable development and
evolution and sophistication. Must involve all stakeholders to work together to contain the
young people and enable them to make decisions on the Internet.
Another issue that must be taken care of a special needs who are suffering many
problems and must engage them in dialogues of Global Forum on Internet Governance so
that they can give their views and how to explain their position and meet the needs of their
own in the governance of the Internet and taken into account in order to be an active force
in the international community , this is the simplest we have rights and part of human
rights.
Ultimately, the Internet’s global Multistakeholder community should work cooperatively on
continuing to improve and evolve the Internet governance system for freedom for youth
and more protection for children from the dangers of internet and take in consideration the
special needs. The more open and inclusive the approach, the greater the legitimacy the
system will have.
The university of Gezira, Sudan believes that existing Multistakeholder institutions
deserve significant credit for the Internet’s global growth and dynamism and should
remain the cornerstones of the Internet governance system. proper incentives and
environment are in place domestically so that a single, interoperable Internet can flourish
globally, enabling freedom of expression and economic prosperity.