Multstakeholder model as a form of democracy
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Avri Doria
Region: US
Organization: Independent Researcher
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: democracy multistakeholderism
Abstract
The note looks at the basic principle of democracy on the Internet and explores the
necessity of a form of participatory democracy; a form we currently refer to as the
multistakeholder model.
Document
One of the first principles of Internet governance is the democratic principle as it contains
within its aspirations the fulfillment of the human rights’ based principles. There are few
who would argue against the principle that Internet governance ought to be democratic.
There is some disagreement, however, on whether the multistakeholder model, currently
being used, represents a way forward for democracy and whether it fulfills the democratic
principle that is central to our discussions.
One of the most common complaints against the Multistakeholder approach is the it bypasses
the democratically elected representives of the people. Often when one is sitting
with governments, one hears a statement of the form:
“ We do not know what Multistakeholder means, but we all know what Democracy means”
Among those who consider themselves democratic, each with its own definition of
democracy, we find:
People’s Democracy
Autocracy 2.0
Constitutional monarchies
Parliamentary republics
Presidential multi-partite republics
Majority based 'one man, one vote' democracy
Democracy that incorporates minority rights in the voting
Democracy that impedes minority rights in the voting
Democracy that balances national religious membership
Plebiscite based direct democracy
Since the time of Aristotle we have been arguing about Democracy and invoking its name
for all sorts of systems where the people, or at least some people, have some say in their
governance regime; at least some of the time. Even Athens was democratic, at least for
males born in Athens.
When we look at the most basic form of multilateral expressions of democracy, we find
that the ‘one person one vote’ is more an ideal than a reality, where nations with a
population of tens of thousands have the same vote as those with a population of over a
billion. Yet we view the UN as representing a form of democracy. We have seen that in
many cases, multilateral democracy does not serve the multivariate interests of the
people - it is focused on the notion of states as entities and it is out of scope to discuss
the needs of people within a country. The muultilateral systems has showj itself to be
inadequate for handling the needs of the Internet, whether it was the creation of the
protocols and other technology that created the Internet or the issues and policy questions
that resulted from the behaviors on the Internet. This is becasue the issues are too
complex for any one grouping, including a global multilateral grouping to handle.
The question comes down to what we mean by democracy on the Internet?
When we speak of democracy, especially with regard to the Internet, we need to develop
ever improved forms of participatory democracy. Participatory democracy is an advance
in democracy that has seen few examples in the world to date outside of the Internet,
though there are some. It is a form of democracy that is enabled by the Internet and one
that may only have been possible in the small town meeting hall before the current age.
The scope of participatory democracy is one that balances the best of representational
democracy with the ideals of direct democracy.
The variety of multistakeholder models are forms of participatory democracy.
Multistakeholder models builds on, and includes, the State based multilateral system in an
attempt to move towards more participation by the people and the organizations they
form. Some states may do a decent job of representing the citizen residing within their
geographically bounded territory for a particular set of interests related to that place and
time. The states, however, do little for a wider set of rights-based interests people may
have, do nothing (or worse) for the non-citizens under their control (especially those who
are undocumented), and have little to say about inter-jurisdictional disputes in the
absence of treaty. Beyond that, the state frequently infringes upon the rights of citizens,
residents and non-resident alike; rights they have agreed to by covenant. The other
human rights based interests require greater participation than can be achieved by
governments alone. It is often Non Governmental Organizations that serve these rights
and cross-border interests without discrimination based on geography, nationality or other
circumstance.
We all have seen, though, many ways in which the multistakeholder models that are being
deployed are still underdeveloped and even flawed at times. There is still a lot to be
complained about, and improved upon. But to misquote Winston Churchill’s quote on
democracy:
“Multistakeholderism is the worst form of governance, except all the others that have been
tried.” (Drake 2011)
The WGIG Background Report explained:
“Democracy is defined in different ways in a multilateral context and by different
stakeholders according to their particular perspectives. Governments generally hold to a
view based on national sovereignty with equal say for all countries and decisions reached
through consensus. Each citizen is held to be represented and to be able to influence
decisions through national consultation and decision-making mechanisms. Some are of
the view that most governments include members of their civil society in their delegations
to the extent practical and in any case they take into account the interests of their civil
societies when establishing agreements at multilateral bodies. Civil society advocates on
the other hand would argue that the term goes beyond this, requiring direct full
participation in decision making by many nongovernmental groups from the private sector
and civil society. Furthermore, they have expressed the view that governments are not
actively or consistently consulting with other sectors of society prior to establishing
agreements within multilateral bodies.” (Page 239 Paragraph 58)
This remains as true now as when it was wrritten a decade ago.
And when the context is the Internet, this stakeholders extends to the technologists who
built and preserve the system as well as the Internet Service Providers and other
industries that deploy the technology.
Even when it comes to governmental representation, governance of the Internet requires
more stakeholder support than just the diplomatic and bureaucratic representatives of
nation states that make up the multilateral system. The process needs the representation
of the variety of governments stakeholders, including regulators, privacy protection, law
enforcement, parliamentarians and others.
Whether it is NGOs that represent the needs and interests of the people they serve, the
technical community in their role as the creators and maintainers of the technology, or the
academics who attempt to understand the dynamics of the social systems within which we
live in this highly interconnected world, all of the stakeholder groups have a place at the
table where they can discuss the issues and decide on solutions for Internet governance
on an equal footing. Anything else leaves some interests without representation, and thus
leaves the populations who feel and express these interests unrepresented, at least in
that respect.
For humanity’s interests to be democratically represented, we need a multistakeholder
framework that includes all people and organizations who have a stake in and care about
the Internet, participating with their own special perspective and skills; with roles and
responsibilities that vary depending on the task at hand but which, in the larger scope are
on equal footing, just as Tuvalu is on an equal footing equal footing with China in the UN
system.
Full representation requires multistakeholder representation and that is a basic
democratic principle.