Document

From my personal perspective, thinking about the basic principles of IG should firstly answer three questions:

 

1) What kind of Cyberspace or information society do we really want ?

 

2) What are these major threats or challenges (existing or potential) to Cyberspace or information sociaty we want ?

 

3) What kind of IG idiom or philosophy and related IG Mechanism can deal with effectively these threats and challenges ?

 

According to thoughts and answers to these questions (for the limitation of characters, I would not deploy specific analyse here), maybe we can take these principles into consideration:

 

1) Principle of Harmony

It has two tiers of meanings, one is "safe", the other is "coexist", it not only describe a kind of static status, but also a kind of dynamic interaction. All the actors, state, civil sociaty and individual should feel safe and comfortable sharing the same place and contribute to the prosperous of entire human sociaty. It's the ultimate target of IG.

 

2) Principle of development

IG should do all efforts of make sure the development of internet and cyberspace and keep the essence of Internet, "open and free"; on the other side,anyone or anything could hinder the development of internet and cyberspace should be punished and stopped. It's the main tast of IG;

 

3) Principle of justice

The world is unequal, but we should not let it be especially in cyberspace and make efforts to make it become a better space where everyone has same right, the stonger should take responsible for their behavior and the weaker should has the opportunity to keep them safe and have the opportunity to make progress.It's the focous of IG;

 

4) Principle of efficiency

Not ony efficient to keep the internet work well and make consistant development, but also efficient to make reform to change some inappropriate stato quo. It's the emergency of IG;

 

5) Principle of dynamics

Things change quick and IG should keep dynamic mechnism to cope with. IG should be open to all options only if needed. It's the neccesary of IG; All these are just brief thinking of principles of IG, i look forward to communicate with experts and scholars worldwide and share their wisdom, and make common contributions to the milestone event of internet goernance.