An extended role for the IGF in filling the gaps in the Internet
governance ecosystem
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Jeremy Malcolm
Region: Malaysia
Organization: Personal submission
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: IGF, multi-stakeholderism, stakeholders, roles, consensus
Abstract
This submission builds on the joint civil society submission developed through the Best
Bits platform, taking as a starting point the distributed model of Internet governance put
forward in that submission. But it adds two notes of caution that the Best Bits submission
does not cover, and proposes possible solutions to these, based around an extended role
for the Internet Governance Forum.
Document
This submission takes as its starting point the submission from participants of the Best
Bits network on “Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance
Ecosystem – institutional mechanisms” (http://bestbits.net/netmundial-roadmap/), which I
participated in drafting and generally agree with (“the Best Bits submission”).
In particular, I take for granted the following points that are either drawn from, or at least
are fully consistent with the Best Bits submission, and I will not explain them further here:
There are certain policy issues that cannot be addressed within the current Internet
governance ecosystem in a way that adequately fulfils basic procedural criteria, due to
underlying institutional deficits.
1.
In addressing these deficits certain criteria must be fulfilled, including a rights-based
approach, preservation of the global nature of the Internet, and the use of multistakeholder
democratic processes.
2.
To redress these deficits requires a new coordinating mechanism to direct
stakeholders towards the appropriate existing fora to deal with policy issues, as well
as one or more new multi-stakeholder working groups to address issues that have
no existing home.
3.
The new multi-stakeholder working groups referred to would in most cases develop
soft law only, rather than binding rules such as treaties, though they could in
appropriate cases make recommendations to external treaty bodies or to the UN
General Assembly.
4.
It would be appropriate for the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to take a key role
in the operationalisation of these required changes, which would require the most
significant reforms to the IGF since its establishment.
There are however two problems that the Best Bits submission does not explicitly
acknowledge, nor suggest a way to overcome, which are the subject of this submission:
(1) There remains a substantial disagreement between (and even within) stakeholder
groups, over whether governments should have a preeminent role and responsibility over
international public policy issues pertaining to the Internet, or whether the roles of all
stakeholder groups in Internet policy development processes should be equal. Practically
speaking, there is no likelihood that NETmundial will see any resolution of this
fundamental disagreement.
In the narrower context of ICANN, the GAC is an unsuccessful attempt to compromise
between these two demands, by giving governments certain rights in the policy
development process that no other stakeholder group has (which upsets those who
demand equality between the stakeholder groups), but by making its recommendations
purely advisory (which upsets those who demand government sovereignty).
It may seem that this problem is irreconcilable, in that any governance institution must
choose either one or the other – either making all stakeholders equal, or giving
governments sovereign rights. But counter-intuitively, it may be possible to satisfy both
demands, and to do so without creating any new body or process, other than those
referred to in the Best Bits submission. The solution involves the following two elements:
(1a) First, there are some issues and contexts in which, as a factual matter, governments
do not claim a primary role in policy development, nor ever have (and the same is true in
other governance domains also). As these typically involve technical issues, the drafters
of the Tunis Agenda accounted for this fact by drawing a (simplistic) division between
“international public policy issues pertaining to the Internet” and “day-to-day technical and
operational matters, that do not impact on international public policy issues”.
A less simplistic approach requires a case-by-case analysis: whenever the coordinating
function as described in the Best Bits submission is exercised, it should consider not only
whether and where policy is being developed, but also what the appropriate roles of
stakeholders are for that issue. Factors relevant to that determination include agreed highlevel
global Internet governance principles (if any), roles and responsibilities historically
exercised in respect of that issue, andthe governance mechanisms that are likely to be
effective in dealing with the issue.
To give some possible examples, it may be found that governments are entitled to take a
leading role in developing global rules on money laundering via the Internet, but that they
should take a back seat in the development of spam filtering standards, and should
participate as equals with other stakeholders in the development of policy for transnational
intellectual property enforcement policies.
By engaging in this analysis (which would itself be conducted by a multi-stakeholder
deliberative body), a more reasoned determination can be made of the appropriate roles
of governments and other stakeholders in a given issue area, than can be had by
resorting to fixed descriptions of stakeholder roles, or an arbitrary demarcation between
“public policy” and “technical and operational” issues. The result will be that the
appropriate role of governments in determining any given policy issue can be defined with
more particularity than simply making a blanket claim of sovereignty.
(1b) Second, for areas in which the coordinating function assesses that governments do
have an appropriate role to play along with other stakeholders, the only way in which to
resolve the disagreement mentioned above is if the multi-stakeholder policy development
process is so designed that the stakeholder groups are formally equal – but allows
governments to veto decisions. Logically the only way in which both those conditions can
both be true is if all stakeholder groups can veto decisions.
This describes a consociational multi-stakeholder process, where a consociation is a
power-sharing arrangement comprising a coalition of stakeholder groups who cooperate
in making decisions together, but who share a right of mutual veto allowing any
stakeholder group to block a joint decision,if there is consensus to do so within that group.
Note that governments, having a legal monopoly on the use of force, have a de facto right
of veto in any multi-stakeholder policy development process anyway; the consociational
structure simply formalises this and grants the other stakeholder groups the same right
(Malcolm 2008, pp.293-294, 466-467, 478-482).
Does this mean that the power of veto would always be exercised, so that nothing would
ever be agreed? Of course it is possible, as it is in any organisation that depends upon
consensus. But by adopting deliberative democratic processes, the likelihood of a veto
power being used strategically become less likely,especially as the social capital invested
by the stakeholders into the IGF compounds. A stakeholder group will not use its power of
veto lightly if this may damage its own longer-term prospects of using the IGF to advance
its own interests later on.
(2) Whilst I support the decentralised model of Internet governance put forward in the Best
Bits submission, there is a second problem that the submission does not acknowledge.
The problem lies in the fact that it allows for the fact that there are a multiplicity of existing
fora where global Internet public policies are developed, but also demands that all of them
adopt (afresh, any many cases) a multi-stakeholder policy development process. Although
absolutely sound in theory, there are two practical faults with this:
(2a) It is very optimistic, to say the least, to call for these existing multiple fora to be
transformed into multi-stakeholder formats. In many cases – the ITU, for example – it will
only take one member state to object to multi-stakeholder reforms in order to close down
such transformation. Therefore in practical terms, this ideal is likely to be impossible to
achieve.
(2b) Even if the previous objection were somehow overcome and there were a multiplicity
of fully accessible and multi-stakeholder fora dealing with Internet policy issues, the task
of addressing all these fora would massive exceed the scope of civil society's limited
financial and human capacity. As the least well resourced stakeholder group, this would
put civil society at a further disadvantage when compared to governments and the private
sector.
To correct for these faults requires a slight gloss upon the recommendations in the Best
Bits submission, that I outline here. Essentially, it involves allowing for a broader role for
the Internet Governance Forum, at least in the short term, whereby the IGF – as the most
accessible, central policy forum for Internet policy discussion – would be tasked with
developing recommendations for other institutions in the Internet governance ecosystem,
if those institutions do not themselves yet have a similar multi-stakeholder process.
This conforms with the IGF's existing mandate to “promote and assess, on an ongoing
basis, the embodiment of WSIS principles in Internet governance processes” (Tunis
Agenda paragraph 72(i)), and to “identify emerging issues, bring them to the attention of
the relevant bodies and the general public, and, where appropriate, make
recommendations” (paragraph 72(g). It is also consistent with its mandate to be nonduplicative
(paragraphs 72(b) and 77), since a multi-stakeholder recommendation to an
external institution is not to be considered duplicative of that institution's less inclusive
decision-making process, even if they both concern the same subject matter (Malcolm
2008, p.439).
Thus notwithstanding that there may be a plethora of other Internet governance bodies,
the development of high-level principlesto guide the work of bodies that are not multistakeholder
in their own right remains an appropriate activity for a reformed IGF.
Whilst the Best Bits submission does contend that “it is a mistake to think that one body,
and one set of experts, could possibly be responsible for effective policy making on all
Internet-related matters”, this is not what I propose. The IGF would continue to have a
very broad mandate, yes. But so too does the General Assembly of the United Nations,
and we do not hear complaints that it lacks expertise to cover all subject areas. This is
because the principal contribution of the General Assembly is not its expertise, but its
legitimacy – and, so it is with the IGF, only extending to other stakeholder groups besides
governments.
Naturally the operational decision making that takes place by reference to the high-level
principles that the IGF develops will remain the responsibility of more specialised bodies,
just as the implementation of resolutions of the General Assembly falls to national
parliaments and specialised agencies, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity.
In summary and conclusion, I fully accept the merits of a distributed model of Internet
governance as set out in the Best Bits submission. But I also caution as to two limitations
that the submission does not cover.
The first is that it does not address the fundamental and irreconcilable disagreement over
whether governments should or should not have greater policy authority than other
stakeholders.I suggest a way of overcoming that disagreement by firstly engaging in a
more thorough analysis of the claims of each stakeholder stakeholder group to participate
in policy development in a given issue area. For issue areas in which governments are
found to have a role, I suggest that the concerns of governments that their sovereignty is
threatened could be addressed by structuring the policy development process according
to a consociational model, that would give governments (and other stakeholder groups) a
right of mutual veto over recommendations that they cannot support.
My second caution is that trying to retro-fit multi-stakeholder democratic legitimacy to a
multitude of existing bodies, in the short term, is likely to prove a quixotic endeavour. It is
also unnecessary when there is already a multi-stakeholder Internet governance
institution – the IGF – thatpossesses a UN mandate to make recommendations across a
broad range of Internet public policy issues, already has the trust and support of all nongovernmental
stakeholders, and is much more accessible to civil society than that
plethora of other bodies could ever be.
In this way the IGF, with its proposed coordinating function, can act as a proxy to receive
multi-stakeholder input into the development of high-level principles for the guidance of
other, less multi-stakeholder institutions. At the same time, the IGF can host multistakeholder
working groups to develop policy on issues for which there is no existing body
to deal with them. In both cases, significant reforms to the IGF would be required – but
these are much more achievable than the similar reforms required to transform the entire
ecosystem of Internet governance institutions.
Bibliography:
Malcolm, Jeremy. Multi-stakeholder Governance and the Internet Governance Forum.
Terminus Press, 2008, available at http://books.google.com/books?id=G8ETBPD6jHIC.