AfICTA Submission to the Global Multistakeholder Meeting
on the Future of Internet Governance ? NET mundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Jimson Olufuye
Region: Africa
Organization: AfICTA - Africa ICT Alliance
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: do-no-harm, openness, accountability, awareness & knowledge
sharing, freedom, multistakeholderism
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 2
Abstract
AfICTA supports and promotes the following PRINCIPLES to be adopted for effective
governance of the Internet:1. DO NO HARM, by ensuring and assuring that the Internet -
and its ecosystem, is not disrupted as a transformational tool for socio-economic
development and the protection of rights of users of the Internet. 2. OPENNESS, through
promoting universal, non-discriminatory and affordable access to the Internet. Poor and
remote users must not be disadvantaged. 3. ACCOUNTABILITY, through democratic and
transparent processes involving all stakeholders, creating an environment of fair and
appropriate standards, regulations and legislation. 4. AWARENESS AND KNOWLEDGE
SHARING, supporting innovation, interoperation and functionality. 5. FREEDOM to use
the Internet for benign purposes by any individual, community, organisation or enterprise.
Document
The NET mundial is focused on getting globally acceptable PRINCIPLES for Internet
Governance and evolving frameworks for further evolution of the Internet. AfICTA and its
members appreciate the opportunity presented by the hosts of NETmundial and look
forward to active participation in this worthwhile process.
AfICTA supports and promotes the following PRINCIPLES to
be adopted for effective governance of the Internet:
1. DO NO HARM, by ensuring and assuring that the Internet - and its ecosystem, is not
disrupted as a transformational tool for socio-economic development and the protection of
rights of users of the Internet.
2. OPENNESS, through promoting universal, non-discriminatory and affordable access to
the Internet. Poor and remote users must not be disadvantaged.
3. ACCOUNTABILITY, through democratic and transparent processes involving all
stakeholders, creating an environment of fair and appropriate standards, regulations and
legislation.
4. AWARENESS AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING, supporting innovation, interoperation
and functionality.
5. FREEDOM to use the Internet for benign purposes by any individual, community,
organisation or enterprise.
AfICTA further submits that the ROADMAP for further
evolution of the Internet can only happen when the following
are in place:
1. Constructive and continuous engagement, which is happening already in IGF, CSTD
and is expected at NETmundial
2. Equal participation of all stakeholders in the Internet Future debates
3. Empowerment of effective participation of stakeholders from developing and least
developed economies, which will mean financial support for representatives of all
categories of stakeholders
4. Recognition that existing multistakeholder institutions have contributed to the Internet’s
global growth and need to remain at the heart of the Internet governance ecosystem
5. Governments should commit to a single, interoperable Internet that can flourish
globally, enabling freedom of expression and economic prosperity.
6. Commitment to collaborate with the private sector toward prevention of crime and
protection of individuals at the global level, including support for national adoption of rule
of law, cooperative mechanism to address risks and threats on the Internet. We must
recognise that the Internet has created new types of economic and personal crime.
Government and the private sector need to collaborate to support improved mechanism to
address risks and threats while educating users about their responsibilities and rights.
The expected resultant effect is CONFIDENCE, STABILITY, SECURITY and
RESILIENCY of the Internet for continuous socio-economic development that can serve
the 2.7 billion users, and support the inclusion of the next 4+ billion users.
About AfICTA
AfICTA - Africa Information & Communication Technologies Alliance is a private sectorled
alliance of ICT Associations, Multi-national Corporations, Companies, Organisations
and Institutions in the ICT sector in Africa.
Vision
Our vision is to fulfil the promise of the digital age for everyone in Africa.
Mission
Our mission is to encourage multi-stakeholder dialogue fostering accelerated and ICT
enabled development in Africa and the use of cutting-edge innovative technologies
including mobile, computing and satellite technologies to achieve an Information society in
Africa.
Goals
Our goals are to:
1. Organise non-state ICT actors in Africa for effective local and continental advocacy by
the year 2015
2. Create awareness and improve African digital literacy by 50% in collaboration with
stakeholders by the year 2020
3. Create partnerships with the African Union and all the regional economic commissions
towards the realization of the WSIS 2015 targets
4. Position more than 50% of African ICT professionals and experts in the business
community, academic and technical community and civil society to be fully engaged in the
global Internet Governance multi-stakeholder dialogues by 2015
5. Be the focal point for Africa ICT advocacy in the global digital economy.
6. Promote business partnership between member’s associations.
7. Contribute to capacities building by promoting best practices, encouraging regional
projects, sharing data (skills, expertise, events, business announcements, exhibitions,
seminars, etc)
8. Organize regional contests and cross-African advocacy