AfICTA Submission to the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance – The NETmundial
Sao Paulo, Brazil, April 23-24, 2014
The NETmundial is focused on getting globally acceptable PRINCIPLES for Internet Governance and evolving frameworks for further evolution of the Internet.
AfICTA and its members appreciate the opportunity presented by the hosts of NETmundial and look forward to active participation in this worthwhile process.
AfICTA supports and promotes the following PRINCIPLES to be adopted for effective governance of the Internet:
1. DO NO HARM, by ensuring and assuring that the Internet - and its ecosystem, is not disrupted as a transformational tool for socio-economic development and the protection of rights of users of the Internet.
2. OPENNESS, through promoting universal, non-discriminatory and affordable access to the Internet. Poor and remote users must not be disadvantaged.
3. ACCOUNTABILITY, through democratic and transparent processes involving all stakeholders, creating an environment of fair and appropriate standards, regulations and legislation.
4. AWARENESS AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING, supporting innovation, interoperation and functionality.
5. FREEDOM to use the Internet for benign purposes by any individual, community, organisation or enterprise
AfICTA further submits that the ROADMAP for further evolution of the Internet can only happen when the following are in place:
1. Constructive and continuous engagement, which is happening already in IGF, CSTD and is expected at NETmundial
2. Equal participation of all stakeholders in the Internet Future debates
3. Empowerment of effective participation of stakeholders from developing and least developed economies, which will mean financial support for representatives of all categories of stakeholders
4. Recognition that existing multistakeholder institutions have contributed to the Internet’s global growth and need to remain at the heart of the Internet governance ecosystem
5. Governments should commit to a single, interoperable Internet that can flourish globally, enabling freedom of expression and economic prosperity.
6. Commitment to collaborate with the private sector toward prevention of crime and protection of individuals at the global level, including support for national adoption of rule of law, cooperative mechanism to address risks and threats on the Internet. We must recognise that the Internet has created new types of economic and personal crime. Government and the private sector need to collaborate to support improved mechanism to address risks and threats while educating users about their responsibilities and rights.
The expected resultant effect is CONFIDENCE, STABILITY, SECURITY and RESILIENCY of the Internet for continuous socio-economic development that can serve the 2.7 billion users, and support the inclusion of the next 4+ billion users.