Internet New Zealand (Inc)
Content Contribution to NetMundial
on the
Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the
Internet Governance ecosystem
regarding
Internationalisation of the IANA Function
7 March 2014
Public Version (there is no confidential version)
For further information, please contact:
Jordan Carter InternetNZ jordan@internetnz.net.nz
Jay Daley .nz Registry Services jay@nzrs.net.nz
Keith Davidson InternetNZ keith@internetnz.net.nz
Debbie Monahan Domain Name Commission dnc@dnc.org.nz
1 Introduction
1.1 This submission is from InternetNZ (Internet New Zealand Inc).
1.2 Our vision is of a better world through a better Internet.
1.3 Our mission is to promote the Internet’s benefits and uses, and protect its
potential.
1.4 We are a membership based, charitable, not-for profit and non-partisan
organisation, working on a wide range of Internet and related
telecommunications issues on behalf of the Internet Community in New
Zealand – both users and the industry as a whole. We work for New
Zealanders on sharing the gains the Internet can bring, for everyone.
1.5 InternetNZ is an At-Large Structure within the ICANN community and is
responsible for the administration of the .nz top level domain.
1.6 InternetNZ has two wholly-owned charitable subsidiaries to whom
management, operation and regulation of the .nz top level domain are
delegated. These are:
1.6.1 .nz Registry Services, the Registry
1.6.2 Domain Name Commission, the Regulator
1.7 InternetNZ has developed a set of principles for TLD administration, in line
with which we operate the .nz TLD: https://internetnz.net.nz/TLDPrinciples
2 Summary
2.1 This submission is in support of the contribution from the Internet Governance
Project (IGP) entitled "Roadmap for globalizing IANA: Four principles
and a proposal for reform"1.
2.2 The IGP contribution sets out four principles to guide IANA contract reform,
which InternetNZ supports. These principles mirror the conclusions we have
reached independently and have practised in our management of the .nz TLD.
2.3 The model proposed by the IGP, particularly for the establishment of a new
body, the DNS Authority, is one that we support in principle, though further
refinement of the model are necessary.
2.4 We offer qualifications and points of detail for consideration in the discussion of
this model in the following sections of this content contribution.
3 Principle 1 - Completely separate root zone file modification
from policymaking
3.1 InternetNZ has long argued for structural separation between the IANA
function and ICANN2. In our view the separation of the IANA registry function
from ICANN's broader policymaking function is in the best interests of TLD
managers and of Internet users as a whole. As we noted in our submission to
the NTIA:
3.2 Experience within the .nz TLD has shown that functional separation of the registry
from the policy development entity, with neither in a position of control over the other,
provides significant and necessary safeguards for the customers. These include:
3.2.1 All registry decisions are directly traceable to a publicly available policy
document. Any gap in this audit trail is a breach of the contract under
which the registry operates and would be expected to lead to contractual
sanctions.
3.2.2 The registry can refuse to carry out any request that does not conform to
the publicly available policy, without any threat of action against it or any
individual as the registry is not contracted to any policy development
entity.
3.2.3 Both the registry and the policy development entity are fully developed
functions, without the priorities of one limiting the investment and
development of the other.
3.3 The approach set out by the IGP is in principle a viable model to achieve this
structural separation. Further detail will of course need to be developed.
4 Principle 2 - Don’t internationalize political oversight: end it
4.1 The IANA contract is often regarded as the key element to be tackled for
ending political oversight of the root. If the strict separation between policy
making and operation of the IANA registry that IGP proposes were in place, it
would be recognised by all concerned that the real issue is political oversight of
the policy making function and not the technical body that implements that
policy.
4.2 By the permanent transfer of the IANA contract to the DNSA, as proposed by
IGP, the IANA function returns to a purely technical function which no state
has oversight of and which requires no political oversight.
4.3 InternetNZ would not support the allocation of the IANA functions to another
politically controlled body of any sort. We believe a separation of multistakeholder
policymaking from technically focused and robust operational
entities are the right way to conduct Internet governance.
5 Principle 3 - Align incentives to ensure the accuracy and
security of root zone maintenance
5.1 For the proposed DNSA, as a purely technical function, the community best
placed to manage the service is the TLD community that relies on it absolutely
for their own operations.
5.2 The TLD community has an exemplary track record of collaborating on
technical matters solely for the public good. A good example is the response to
the Conficker worm, which saw almost all TLDs acting quickly, in unison and
without payment to block the domain names that were being registered by this
worm that threatened to infect a large proportion of home computers.
6 Principle 4 - Delink
IANA globalization from broader ICANN
reforms
6.1 The broader reforms aimed at balancing the views of governments, the private
sector and civil society and increasing the international engagement in the policy
around the 'root' are not problems that are going to be solved quickly. In the
proposal from IGP these problems remains but is now rightly restricted to the
reform of ICANN, which would set the policy for the root that DNSA would
be required to follow.
6.2 The establishment of the DNSA would not in any way reduce the potential
scope of the oversight nor does it guarantee disproportionate influence to any
one state or other actor. All of the authority remains with the policy function,
rooted in the ICANN community.
7 Other Matters
7.1 InternetNZ supports efforts being made to meet the timetable set out in the
IGP paper. This would see the model being detailed and a demonstrable level of
support being available by the time that the current IANA contract expires (30
September 2015).
7.2 InternetNZ prefers the ending of political oversight of the root as set out in the
model, but if as part of the transition the matter was a bottom line for some
stakeholders, we would not be concerned if a limited term extension of the
IANA contract between NTIA and the new DNSA was brought into being.
8 Conclusion
8.1 The IGP proposal rightly separates out technical function of root zone
administration from the policy making process, which should be the focus of
attention for governments and other stakeholders when considering the future
of Internet governance. It also provides a sensible and broadly workable plan
for the operation of that technical function.
8.2 For those reasons InternetNZ supports in principle the proposal from the
Internet Governance Project.
8.3 We look forward to being part of the conversation in São Paulo as the debate
proceeds.
With many thanks for your consideration,
Yours sincerely,
InternetNZ