Arab Internet Governance Community Proposal on Global
Internet Principles
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Hanane Boujemi
Region: MENA
Organization: Hivos
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: balanced, multistakeholderism, bottom up, human rights
Abstract
Members of the Arab IGF community and representatives of Internet Governance
stakeholders in the Arab region would like to present a list of global Internet Governance
principles aimed at guaranteeing people around the world the full educational, economic,
social, cultural, developmental, and transformational benefits of an open, secure, stable
and multilingual Internet, maintaining unrestricted access to all resources and capabilities
of this global network, while securing privacy, freedom of expression, the availability and
free flow of information and net neutrality.
Document
The Internet plays an important role in fostering knowledge, education, innovation and
business. It is a revolutionary tool which has had, and will continue to have, major
impacts on humanity, and has drastically transformed every aspect of our being. For the
Internet to continue growing as a global tool beneficial to the public interest, global
principles of Internet Governance need to be discussed, agreed upon and adopted by all
stakeholders of the Internet community.
Such agreement on Internet Governance principles should take into consideration the
following:
1. Governance of the Internet should be based on a multi-stakeholder model with wide,
balanced and global representation of all stakeholder groups. More efforts should be
deployed to ensure wider engagement of stakeholders from developing countries to
achieve a globally balanced multi-stakeholder model for Internet Governance.
2. While Internet public policies implementation is the main responsibility of governments,
the necessary mechanisms should be adopted to encourage a bottom up and community
driven approach in designing those policies to best serve the public interest.
3. Respecting international laws, rights, and freedoms are the responsibility of every
Internet stakeholder. The internet must guarantee Human Rights and freedoms as
ordained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and any other pertinent legal document.
4. Users' Rights online are central and should be improved materialization of those rights
offline. Current legislation applied on the Internet which hinders any aspect of the basic
human rights as stipulated in international instruments should be reviewed and adapted to
guarantee that Internet rights are identical to offline rights.
5. Open, inclusive, neutral and unrestricted access to the Internet is central to democratic
and socio-economic development. Data protection, privacy, security and freedom of
expression are basic to the development of the Internet.
6. The rule of law, open, equal, unhindered, affordable access, and multilingualism are
basic requirements for every Internet user to be empowered to reap the full benefit of
internet resources. Any adopted governance mechanisms should be based on worldwide
best practices to avoid Internet censorship.
7. While the general security and the protection of the users and their rights are global
multi-stakeholder responsibility lead by governments, the day-to-day technical
management of the Internet is the responsibility of the private sector and the technical
community. None of these responsibilities (i.e., neither security and the protection of the
citizens nor technical management) should undermine the general principles of Internet
neutrality, transparency and Inclusiveness of all stakeholders in the decision making
process.
8. State sovereignty stipulated by international treaties and users privacy should be
respected and protected from external surveillance operations.
9. The Internet is a global public good. Critical Internet resources, including root servers,
names and numbers, need to be managed globally, through a model that is fair,
transparent and accountable to the international Internet community.