techUK response to the NET mundial meeting on Internet
Governance
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Stephen Hearnden
Region: UK
Organization: techUK
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: multistakeholderism, ICANN
Abstract
techUK believe for the Internet to remain a source for the good then it is vital that the
Governance Principles are fully supported by all the stakeholders with a proper
consensus.
Document
We believe for the Internet to remain a source for the good then it is vital that the
Governance Principles are fully supported by all the stakeholders with a proper
consensus. The Internet is evolving rapidly and if the principles are too specific and
detailed then they become out of date very quickly as society changes as well as the
technology. It is better for the principles to be high level rather than just a long list of
detailed statements which will be less effective. We have seen examples in the past
where this has happened and as a result they have not attracted support from some
stakeholders. If possible we should aim for a genuine Global consensus that is capable of
being flexible to the changing needs of the stakeholders and their roles. If we don’t then
we risk stifling innovation.
techUK fully supports the continuing use of the multi stakeholder model recognising that it
will continue to evolve to remain fit for purpose. It should also be able to take on the
needs of countries who have less resources to allow the developing world to grow. Rural
and remote communities worldwide will benefit from the internet and it is incumbent on the
developed nations to help support these aims. Here in Europe market liberalisation has
brought enormous benefits which we would like to see replicated in all parts of the world
which in turn will allow growth to benefit all.
We do not see a need for the creation of a single international organisation as internet
problems are perfectly well taken care of in existing organisations such as the WTO and
others. This allows stakeholders to have their concerns addressed using existing
processes via existing organisations.
It is vital that a single internet is retained as fragmentation and localism would seriously
undermine the economic and social benefits we draw from it today. We should also
recognise however that the network architecture of the internet is changing with far less
traffic being routed through the US than was hitherto the case. This is not a bad thing and
it improves the traffic management as local hubs begin to appear in place of high traffic
concentration. ICANN is reflecting these changes and techUK supports this. We also
believe that ICANN should remain a technical organisation and should not stray into areas
of politics and policy.
Finally to repeat again the multi stakeholder model is vital to the future wellbeing of the
internet and changes should be resisted unless everyone can see major benefits in them.