Russian parliament submission to NET mundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Robert Shlegel
Region: Russian Federation
Organization: State Duma Of The Russian Federation (Parliament of the
Russia)
Sector: Government
Keywords: human rights, coordinated strategies, internet ecosystem,
critical resources, IANA, government roles, ethical issues
Abstract
Honorable Colleagues! I propose to bring the following topics to the agenda of the NET
mundial in So Paulo: 1. Coordinated strategies for effective Internet governance 2.
Protection of users rights 3. The evolution of the Internet ecosystem 4. Critical Internet
resources governance. IANA: Quest for the Rest 5. Clarifying the role and authority of
governments 6. Ethical Issues in the Informational Environment
Document
Honorable Colleagues!
I propose to bring the following topics to the agenda of the NET mundial in São Paulo:
1. Coordinated strategies for effective Internet governance
Internet has penetrated into all spheres of human life, and it became oneof the most
important means to ensure human rights and democracy. However it carries equally
important threats. The incident with Snowden has demonstrated a complete lack of
security and control. The necessity to protect the rights of the citizens causes the actions
of the states to establish legal framework for relations arising while using the Internet. But
the attempts to create legislation in this sphere are not systematic, that can lead to
negative consequences, taking into account the cross-border nature of the Internet. The
task of creating legislation in this sphere must be systematic and must be achieved by
concerted actions of all the states to develop a unified international legally binding
legislation.
2. Protection of users rights
Today the world faced with widespread violation of human rights on the web. These
violations are global, worldwide and appear as from the individual states and also from
major transnational companies, criminal groups and individuals. This situation tends to
undermine confidence on the Internet by users and threatens with fragmentation of the
Network. For many governments inability to protect the rights of their citizens may
become a pretext for creating protective barriers. There are many such examples already.
International community must find ways to deal with violations of the rights of users,
before such a practice has not become commonplace, in order to preserve the integrity,
freedom and openness of the Internet. The States, together with other stakeholders,
should find the frameworks of the protection of the rights of users and ensure the
protection of these rights in those areas in which the States have the exclusive authority
and responsibility.
3. The evolution of the Internet ecosystem
The future of Internet is foggy. Traditionally, we see the Internet in its static, current state.
But the Internet ecosystem is constantly developing. New technologies, new challenges,
new stakeholders appear. The influence of some stakeholders reduces and the influence
of others increases.
There is no single global approach to determination of the policy and direction of
development in this area. It is necessary to define a unified conceptual apparatus for all
objects and processes of the Internet, and the very definition of Internet governance.
Applying the multistakeholder approach, it is necessary to determine the degree of
responsibility of each of the sides of interaction. Currently this is not done.
It leads to the fact that there are different groups that claim to have a right to decide what
will be the future of the Internet. However, decision-making in this area requires a broader
discussion and consensus than some meetings behind the closed doors. IGF is perfectly
suited for this, exactly IGF, but not the elite groups that are able to determine the vector of
development of Internet governance.
At a forum in Istanbul it is essential to discuss – how we see the evolution of "Internet"
ecosystem governance, what principles will be used for this, to listen to the opinions of
stakeholders and, perhaps, apply on this occasion.
4. Critical Internet resources governance. IANA: Quest for the Rest
To date, the World Wide Web has proven its stability. The critical infrastructure, in
particular, the system DNS, is stable. However, in future individual outdated control
system elements pose a threat to the sustainable development of the Internet. For
example, the control of one government for the root zone governance system that
performs IANA. It worries the international community. In the future, the alternative
scenario of the DNS implementation is possible. In addition, the lack of transparency
undermines the credibility of the entire control system of the critical infrastructure of the
Internet as a whole.
In general, the IANA functions quite effectively. That’s why it is proposed to include to the
agenda of the Internet Governance Forum the issue of necessity to review the contract
and the relevant IANA procedures for its implementation.
The next step in this direction should be discussion of the creation of a working group that
will develop proposals for the formation of an international body for oversight and audit
IANA.
Such a body should have appropriate technical competencies and enjoy the wider
international community confidence. Its activities should be based on the agreement
providing the mechanism of accountability, and be entirely focused on protecting the
public interest.
5. Clarifying the role and authority of governments
Internet is transboundary. But national states have fixed and clearly defined boundaries
within which they spread their laws and economic rules. They can not avoid affecting the
legal entities using the Internet. Each country solves problems of security, intellectual
property, and distribution of domains. Internet is used and for political purposes differently.
These issues can be determined on the international level through conventions and
treaties, but more often it does not. This process should be activated. Therefore it is
necessary to define what should be regulated at the international level, and to what extent
the Internet can be controlled independently.
6. Ethical Issues in the Informational Environment
Enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights the principle of freedom of
speech is a fundamental basis of the Internet functioning. It is a global information
environment that provides free cross-border flow and exchange of information. However,
such conceptual documents as the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of Europe states that realization of these freedoms
in a democratic society imposes duties and responsibilities established by law.
Finding a balance between the informational human rights and the principle of their
restrictions for protection of these rights and the rights of third parties is a challenge for all
stakeholders involved in Internet governance.
The right to freedom of information exchange in the network must be protected from
excessive restrictions and controls. Including against unauthorized surveillance. It places
special responsibility on the state as the guarantor of the rights of both the national and
international level.
Therefore, at the present stage of development of the Internet, global Internet
communities need to revert to the ethical principles in the field of information and
mechanisms for their implementation . The platform for dialogue on the issue could be the
Internet Governance Forum. In addition, the Forum should explore the possibility of
analyzing and making appropriate recommendations by forces created in 2012 by the
Working Group on the Principles of the Internet (Working Group on Internet Principles)