Norwegian contribution to the So Paulo meeting
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Norwegian government
Region: Norway, Europe
Organization: Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority
Sector: Government
Keywords: universal rights, human rights
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Norway welcomes this opportunity to provide our input in this discussion on the future of
internet governance. The internet is a driving force for global economic growth,
innovation, efficient communication and open dialogue. Internet has opened up for new
ways to interact between governments and its citizens, for new ways to run businesses
and for new ways to develop democracy and for individuals to exercise their universal
rights. Herein lie the core values ? and the challenges ? of the internet.
Document
Internet Governance principles
1. Many important principles for Internet Governance have been developed within
different organizations, with different perspectives. The Council of Europe Declaration by
the Committee of Ministers on Internet Governance principles has a human rights
perspective, the OECD Council Recommendation on Principles for Internet Policy Making
has an economic perspective, the Brazilian Internet Steering Committee CGI.br has also
developed principles for the Governance and use of the Internet. All the mentioned
principles, other Internet Governance principles not mentioned and previous discussions
on principles, including the newly published Communication from the European
Commission and the UN Human Rights council are among the organizations that have
provided principles that can contribute to guidance and perspectives in the development
of global Internet Governance principles.
2. Global Internet Governance principles should take into account universal principles that
will apply regardless of conditions and events. Further, Global Internet Governance
principles should be applicable regardless of the technological, social and cultural
developments that lie ahead of us. For the Internet Governance principles to be truly
global, they must be supported by all relevant stakeholders. Flexibility and good will from
all stakeholders will be required in order to achieve such a global consensus.
3. Against this background, Norway proposes that the global Internet Governance
principles should be directed at the following:
a. Promoting an open, free, global, robust, secure and resilient Internet.
b. Respecting universal human rights and fundamental freedoms.
c. Complying with international law and legislation as implemented in the off-line world,
including the right to privacy.
d. Sustaining the flexibility inherent in the multi-stakeholder model for developing policy,
with a view to ensuring that all relevant stakeholders are included and can participate and
contribute.
e. Enhancing democratic values such as accountability, non-discrimination, transparency,
representativeness and openness.
f. Respecting and addressing public interests for the benefit of all internet users.
A roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
1. The Internet Governance Ecosystem consists of many different organizations and
stakeholders. Internet Governance is addressed at several international arenas and at
various levels. One important arena for dialogue is the Internet Governance Forum (IGF).
Regional initiatives such as the Latin America and Caribbean Internet Governance Forum
(LACIGF), the European Dialogue on Internet Governance (EuroDig) and other regional
and national initiatives listed on the IGF website are also useful arenas, among others.
2. For the further evolution of the Internet Governance ecosystem the implementation of
agreed global principles will be essential. These global principles should form the basis of
the practical implementation for processes, rules and procedures in the existing multistakeholder
organizations and other organization that have a role in the Internet
Governance ecosystem.
3. The multi-stakeholder model can continue to be developed. This could include more
accountability, respect and sensitivity for the different public policies in multi-stakeholder
organizations. Participation of all stakeholders should also be ensured and greater
transparency should be introduced.
4. In certain areas there is an information overflow and a remedy for this to enable
stakeholders to be properly informed, should be promoted. The recommendations from
CSTD WG on improvements to the IGF should be utilized to strengthen IGF as an arena
for further dialogue, sharing of best practices and better cooperation. We are also looking
forward to the outcome of the CSTD WG on enhanced cooperation. The initiative from the
European Commission, the Global Internet Policy Observatory (GIPO), can be useful to
help all stakeholders keeping track of Internet Governance activities and help
stakeholders to identify the important issues.
5. Capacity building in order to enable everybody to utilize the full potential the internet
has for economic growth and development, will be crucial and should be promoted in a
Roadmap. Capacity building should not be an issue for states alone. We should find the
best ways and the best mechanisms for efficient capacity building by drawing on the
resources and the competence from a number of stakeholders.
6. The recommendations proposed in the report from Affirmation of Commitment review
teams should be addressed to improve the accountability and transparency of ICANN and
to improve further processes and stakeholder participation in ICANN.
7. Further globalization of ICANN and the IANA-function has been called for and steps
have already been taken in this regard. Norway welcomes and supports such a process
whilst acknowledging that due consideration must be given to the security and stability of
the DNS.
8. ICANN’s Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC) provides an important channel in
which governments can raise their public policy concerns to the attention of ICANN. We
believe that an efficient GAC benefits us all. ICANN’s role is a technical one and not a
political one. It should remain that way also in the future regardless of how the IANA
function will be managed. Thus, ICANN should not be used as an arena for political
debates, nor should the IANA function be politicized in any way.