Government of India?s initial submission to Global
Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet
Governance, Sau Paulo, Brazil, April 23-24, 2014.
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Ministry of External Affairs
Region: India
Organization: Ministry of External Affairs
Sector: Government
Keywords: Multilateralism, Representative , Security, Internationalization,
Equinet
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Government of India?s initial submission to Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future
of Internet Governance, Sau Paulo, Brazil, April 23-24, 2014.
Document
General:
1. Internet is a shared resource and a global commons available to public. An open,
stable and secure Internet, and unhindered access to information and knowledge, is
crucial to global connectivity, innovation and economic development.
2. Internet with its immense transformational potential can provide the means for
sustainable and inclusive development in a country in areas such as education,
healthcare, financial inclusion and service delivery. The medium of Internet provides voice
to the voiceless as never before in the history of mankind. This potential can be realized
only by providing universal access and affordable devices. The Digital divide must be
relegated to the past – instead, the communities must reap the benefits of the digital
dividend. Therefore, we recommend to make a transformational shift from the Internet of
today to the “Equinet” of tomorrow.
3. The exponential growth of the Internet and its all encompassing impact on our lives
necessitates putting in place an effective and international mechanism todevelop, make
and implement international public policies in the technical, economic and social, and
strategic domains of the Cyber space.
Internet Governance and Management System:
4. Governance of the Internet is quite complex and involves range of issues ofvaried
nature such as technical, legal, public policy, equitable access, privacy andsecurity of the
infrastructure and information. Given that the core infrastructureof the Internet is not
protected by any international legal regime, it is importantto shape a globally acceptable
legal regime to maintain the openness, securityand international trust in the Internet.
5. The management of Internet encompasses both technical and public policyissues and
should involve all stakeholders and relevant intergovernmental andinternational
organisations. Policy authority for Internet-related public policyissues is the sovereign right
of states.
6. The Internet Governance should be multilateral, transparent, democratic,and
representative, with the participation of governments, private sector, civilsociety, and
international organizations, in their respective roles. This should beone of the foundational
principles of Internet Governance.
7. The structures that manage and regulate the core internet resources needto be
internationalized, and made representative and democratic.The governance of the
Internet should also be sensitive to the cultures and nationalinterests of all nations. The
mechanism for Governance of the Internet shouldtherefore be transparent and should
address all related issues. The Internet mustbe owned by the global community for mutual
benefit and be renderedimpervious to possible manipulation or misuse by any particular
stake holderwhether State or non-State.
8. The upcoming WSIS+10 review in 2015 provides a significant opportunity tobuild
confidence in the international community on Cyber space by rectifying thegaps in the
implementation of Tunis Agenda and by establishing mechanisms todevise a roadmap
and to implement it for effectively addressing emergingchallenges and opportunities by
the World Information Society.
9. Recognizing that the Tunis Agenda of 2005 endorsed by the UN GeneralAssembly
created Internet Governance Forum (IGF) as a platform for multi-stakeholder policy
dialogue, the IGF should continue to enrich such dialogueamong relevant stakeholders.
Internet and Security
10. International law, and in particular the Charter of United Nations, isapplicable and is
essential in maintaining security and stability and promoting anopen, secure, peaceful and
accessible ICT environment. All governments shouldhave an equal role and responsibility
for ensuring stability, security, andcontinuity of the Internet.
11. The application of norms derived from existing international law relevant tothe use of
ICTs by States is an essential measure to reduce risks to internationalpeace, security and
stability. Common understandings on how such norms shallapply to State behavior and
the use of ICTs by State requires further study. Giventhe unique attributes of ICTs,
additional norms could be developed overtime.
12. Voluntary confidence building measures can promote trust and assuranceamong
States and help reduce the risk of conflict by increasing predictability andreducing
misperception. States need to consider ways of cooperation inimplementing acceptable
norms and principles of responsible behaviour,including the role that may be played by
private sector and civil societyorganizations.
13. Given the pace of ICT development and the scope of the threat, States needto
enhance common understandings and intensify practical cooperation throughregular
institutional dialogue with broad participation under auspices of theUnited Nations, as well
as regular dialogue through bilateral, regional andmultilateral fora, and other international
organizations.Cyber security and Cyber crime:
14. Governments, business, organization and individual owner and users ofinformation
technologies must assume responsibility for and take steps toenhance the security of the
information technologies.
15. Law enforcement cooperation in the investigation and prosecution ofinternational
cases of criminal misuse of ICTs in cyberspace should be coordinatedamong all
concerned states. States should intensify cooperation against criminaluse of ICTs,
harmonize legal approaches as appropriate and strengthen practicalcollaboration
between respective law enforcement and prosecutorial agencies.
16. The global nature of cyber crime requires strengthening of existing andconsideration
of new national and international legal or other responses to cybercrime.
17. A mechanism for accountability should be put in place in respect of crimescommitted
in cyberspace, such that the Internet is a free and secure space foruniversal benefaction.
A ‘new cyber jurisprudence’ needs to be evolved to dealwith cyber crime, without being
limited by political boundaries and cyber-justicecan be delivered in near real time.
Capacity building
18. Capacity building is of vital importance to an effective cooperative globaleffort on
securing ICTs and their use.
19. All stakeholders need to facilitate the transfer of information technologyand capacitybuilding
to developing countries, in order to help them to takemeasures to improve cybersecurity
develop technical skill and appropriatelegislation, strategies and regulatory
frameworks to fulfil their responsibilities;and bridge the divide in the security of ICTs and
their use.
20. International cooperation should be extended for capacity building in areasrelevant to
the Internet Governance. This includes, in particular, building centresof expertise and
other institutions to facilitate knowhow transfer and exchangebest practices, in order to
enhance the participation of developing countries inInternet governance mechanisms.
Social and Cultural aspects:
21. The same rights that people have offline must also be protected online, inparticular
freedom of expression which is applicable regardless of frontiers andthrough any media of
one’s choice in accordance with article 19 of the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights.
22. All stakeholders commit to work earnestly towards multi lingualization ofthe Internet. In
this context, States also support advances in the process of multi-lingualism in areas
including Domain Names, E-mail Addresses and key work look-up.
23. All Stakeholders commit to encourage the development of locally relevantinformation,
applications and services that will benefit developing countries andcountries with
economies in transition.