TELECOM ITALIA GROUP's SUBMISSION for NETmundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: LORENZO PUPILLO
Region: Italy, Brazil
Organization: TELECOM ITALIA GROUP
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Dynamic Internet, Multi-stakeholder model with variable
geometry
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Telecom Italia Group is pleased to provide this submission on Global Internet Governance
Principles and a Roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem
to the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance, to be held
23-24 April 2014 in San Paolo, Brazil
Document
Telecom Italia Group’s Submission for NETmundial
(7 March 2014)
Abstract:
Telecom Italia Group is pleased to provide this submission on Global Internet
Governance Principles and a Roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet
governance ecosystem to the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet
Governance, to be held 23-24 April 2014 in San Paolo, Brazil
Introduction
Telecom Italia Group (hereafter TI) welcomes the opportunity to participate to the “Global
Multi-stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance “or NETmundial.
We acknowledge the leading role that, since the WTPF of 2013, the government of Brazil
is playing, in the Internet governance arena, by calling this meeting. We would like to
contribute to this event through our participation to the discussion of Internet Governance
Principles and of the evolution of the multi-stakeholder model for the future of Internet
governance.
The meeting’s agenda is focused on two issues:
1. Internet Governance Principles
2. Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance
Telecom Italia submits contributions on both issues.
Internet Governance Principles
Internet is today at the center of the economic activity and social life of enterprises and
citizens. Every day it becomes more important and more pervasive thanks to the massive
investment in infrastructure made by the telcos, the hundreds of thousands of applications
and services made available by the internet ecosystem of companies and developers, the
development of high speed mobile internet access, cloud computing and ubiquitous
computing. We no longer need to go on the internet because we live in the Internet.
Internet has been a remarkable success and Telecom Italia believes that this historical
result has been to a large extent a consequence of the unregulated nature of this
technology.
Contrary to the past, the economics and the technology of Internet call today for more
variety and Internet differentiation. While this process has been present for quite some
time, it is today more visible, for instance, in the multi-lingual diversification of Internet.
Recently, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) announced
that the first new generic Top-Level Domains (gTLDs) in Arabic, Cyrillic and Chinese from
its new gT LD Program were delegated.
A more heterogeneous and diversified Internet might alarm many in the Internet
community. Instead this process is quite desirable. Quite often we talk about the Internet
as an ecosystem, but we forget that in any ecosystem a high degree of diversity is vital for
the overall health and resilience of the system.
At the same time, TI believes that the Internet needs to be governed by a coherent set of
principles shared by all stakeholders from various sector- business, government and civil
society.
These principles should be based on a broad and open debate characterized by a
constitutional effort and should encompass an overarching framework of universal values
shared by the internet community. The San Paolo meeting could be a step in this
direction. There is already a significant amount of work done to develop Internet
governance principles by different organizations and players. The OECD Council
Recommendations on Principles for Internet Policymaking or the Brazilian Internet
Steering Committee’s (CGI.br) are some good examples.
Among these principles, TI particularly supports:
Promoting safe, secure, open, reliable and interoperable Internet
Strengthening consistency and effectiveness in privacy protection at a
global level
Promoting policies that stimulate sustainable investments and deployment
of Internet networks
Endorsing policies that increase transparency, openness , accountability
and inclusiveness in the Internet Governance process
Possibly, one of the goals of San Paolo’s meeting should be the recognition that these
principles should be shared and considered as common principles by all the
stakeholders of the meeting.
Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance
The technological and economic environment of Internet has dramatically changed since
the mid-1990s, making Internet much more diverse and dynamic than in the past.
According to the most recent literature[1] four major changes have forced the networks to
evolve since then:
1) Increase in the number and diversity of end users: from a small population of
scientists and researchers to a user base much larger, more diverse and less
technologically sophisticated;
2) Increase in the diversity and intensity of applications: from low intensity
bandwidth applications such as email and web?browsing to videoconferencing, to online
gaming which is much more bandwidth intensive;
3) Increase in the variety of technologies: while in the mid?90s access to the
Internet was granted through dial?up modems, now access is guaranteed through a
variety of technologies such as cable modems, digital subscriber lines (DSL), fiber to the
home and wireless solutions. These new technologies have different characteristics in
terms of bandwidth, reliability and mobility, bringing a substantial degree of heterogeneity
in the Internet world compared to the uniformity of the wireline solutions of the mid?90s
4) The emergence of more complex business relationships. In the mid?90s, the
topology of the Internet was characterized by a strict three?level hierarchy: backbones,
regional Internet service providers and last mile access providers. Now the Internet, as a
network of networks, is characterized by a set of much more diverse business
relationships such as, for instance, private peering and content delivery networks.
These technological and economic changes have placed increasing pressures on the
Internet and in, particular, are leading, among other characteristics, towards:
1) changes in the optimal level of standardization to match the greater demand for
heterogeneity;
2) the shift towards more formal governance to manage the increase in the number
and heterogeneity of end users;
3) the migration of functions into the core of the network for a better management
of security and congestion;
4) the growing complexity of internet pricing to support the new business relations
of today Internet.
These technological and economic changes over the past fifteen?plus years have made
Internet a much more dynamic and heterogynous environment and are placing
increasing pressures on the Internet to develop new architectural principles to cope with
these new dynamics and to the Internet governance process to envisage new models
able to better match governance issues with the right governance institutions.
The diffusion of cross layers architecture for the mobile Internet is a case in point that
shows that when circumstances have changed sufficiently, the network architecture needs
to change.
Protocol layering has always been at the heart of Internet and coherence with the layered
stack has always characterized Internet architecture. Protocol layering has also find an
ad hoc space into the discussion of Internet Policy when, it has been suggested that lower
layers of the Internet should be subjected to regulation while upper layers should be
exempted from it. The weakness of this approach has been later on shown by the
regulatory intervention on some parts of the networks only such as the last mile but not
the backbone or by the recent awareness that market power is also possible in the upper
layers as the latest antitrust cases against Microsoft and Google have demonstrated.[2]
It is clear the need to diverge from the traditional protocol layering assumptions in order to
face the challenges from a more dynamic and heterogynous Internet driven by mobile
applications.
Against this backdrop, TI believes that it is necessary to examine the current status of the
Internet governance, of the institutions currently involved in this process and assess
how the Internet governance should evolve capitalizing on the strength of the past
experiences and aiming at fostering an open and inclusive Internet.
Towards a multi-stakeholder model with variable geometry
TI recognizes that the multi-stakeholder model has been an important factor for the
success of the Internet. However, TI believes that the multi-stakeholder model while
worked efficiently in ad hoc technical organizations, it requires a completely different effort
to be successful when it is applied to global policy making.[3] The open nature of the multistakeholder
process does not guarantee by itself an effective participation of all
stakeholders. Indeed, participation today has become the main principle of any form of
Internet governance. This process, sometimes called “participatory evangelism”, offers
people opportunities to get involve but not to really count in the decision making process.
Indeed “there is an important distinction between making your views known and making
your views counts”. Analogous considerations can be made regarding the transparency of
the multi-stakeholder process. Quite often information overload characterizes meetings
and fora of the multi-stakeholder process creating real difficulties in identifying really
important issues. Furthermore, different risks of capture by different groups (“Internet
evangelists” or representatives from developed countries in the IGF or in the GAC within
ICANN, or the private sector) have been suggested in the current process. Therefore, a
stronger effort is required by all parties to improve and make more successful this process.
At the same time, TI believes that it is necessary to recognize that today new dynamics
exist among the stakeholders of the Internet governance process. There are few
significant examples of such a change. The more active role that governments want to
play on internet governance issues is a recent trend that is here to stay. The powerful
role multiple stakeholders can play in the internet governance arena; it suffice to mention
the massive online boycott launched by Internet technologies companies and civil society
as a response to the two proposed bills in the US, the SIPA and the PIPA.[4]
This new dynamic among stakeholders associated with an overall increase of Internet
differentiation brought by the economic and technological changes of the Internet of the
last 15 years, suggest that it is increasing difficult that one single governance regime
could address the broad range of concerns associated with today’s Internet.
Searching for a unitary governance framework could lead only towards an undesirable
least common denominator. What is needed is to allow for a better match between
governance issues and the best governance institutions available. Therefore, TI suggests
that the current system of governance should allow for a stronger interplay among the
different actors in the internet governance arena. Therefore, TI envisages the evolution of
the current multi-stakeholder model towards a multi-stakeholder model with variable
geometry.
This approach should be seen as an evolution from the current institutions. In the current
multi-stakeholder model a distinction between the concepts of shared and equal
responsibility, should be made. While all stakeholders need to participate in the multi
stakeholder model on equal footing when the different governance issues and governance
institutions are envisaged and discussed, then in the implementation of the governance
process one stakeholder or a coalition of stakeholders (variable geometry) could take
the lead in this process according to the nature of the governance issue at stake:
standards (the private sector), Internet issues relevant to particular communities (civil
society), human rights (government).
The matching process could also be facilitated by the creation of an ad hoc committee
that, based on a multi-stakeholder membership, could suggest the most suitable
governance institution.[5]
Therefore, this process, based on the variable leading role of the different actors, should
allow for a better match of each type of governance challenge with the best governance
institution.
Elements of a roadmap from the San Paolo Meeting
TI recommends that the San Paolo‘s meeting makes concrete steps towards:
1) A roadmap for the revision and the reinforcement of the multi-stakeholder model
according to the previously suggested variable geometry approach.
2) A clear timeline to globalize ICANN and IANA functions that safeguards the stability,
security and resilience of the Internet.
3) A commitment to strengthen the role of the Global Internet Governance Forum
according to:
a. Mainstreaming the content and the proposals discussed at the Global Forum to the
other Internet Governance institutions to enhance its impact on global Internet
governance and policy.
b. Making stronger the interactions between the Global IGF and the national and
regional IGF to allow for a more inclusive process of participation and discussion.
c. Designing mechanisms for a better funding of the Global IGF.
[1] See on this Christopher Yoo (2012), “The Dynamic Internet:How technologies, Users
and Businesses Are Transforming the Network”, AEI .
[2] Today, to ensure reliability modern wireless broadband network increasingly deploy
network-based reliability systems, such as Automatic Repeat request(ARQ), that shift
functions traditionally performed by the transport layer into either the data-link layer or
routers operating in the core, clearly diverging from the TCP/IP reference model. See on
this : Christopher Yoo, “Protocol Layering and Internet Policy”, University of Pennsylvania
Law School Research Paper n.18, 2013
[3] See on this, Bertrand de la Chapelle (2011), Internet Policy Making, MIND .
Furthermore, see IGP (2009)”ICANN, Inc: Accountability and participation in the
governance of critical Internet Resources “
[4] Stop Online Piracy Act” (SOPA) and the “Preventing Real Online Threats to Economic
Creativity and Theft of Intellectual Property Act” (PROTECT IP Act or PIPA). See on this
Laura De Nardis (2014) , “The Global War for Internet Governance”, Yale University
Press, pag 6. SOPA:Stop
[5] This idea has been mentioned at the IGF in Bali (2013) in workshop n.41