BUSBC Suggested Principles for Internet Governance
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Renata Vasconcellos
Region: United States
Organization: Brazil-U.S. Business Council, U.S. Section
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Principles
Abstract
We applaud the efforts of the Brazilian government to coordinate the engagement of a
broad group of stakeholders to discuss such an important topic. The Internet represents
one of the greatest engines for growth, providing benefits across regions and levels of
development. It is the great equalizer, providing businesses of all sizes the opportunity to
access the billions of consumers outside of their physical location and to compete on the
quality of products offered. The Internet allows consumers, educators, and health
providers alike the ability to access the best products and technology and to share
information throughout the world. This all depends on a governance structure that is open,
transparent, and representative of all stakeholders. The current multistakeholder model
approach to Internet governance has fulfilled these needs while creating a decentralized
structure that fueled rapid development around the world.
Document
To Whom It May Concern:
Established in 1976, the U.S. Section of the Brazil-U.S. Business Council (Brazil Council)
is the premier business advocacy organization dedicated to strengthening the economic
and commercial relationship between Brazil and the United States, representing more
than 100 of the top U.S. companies with investments in Brazil. The U.S. Chamber of
Commerce (U.S. Chamber), the world’s largest business federation representing the
interests of more than three million businesses of all sizes, sectors, and regions, as well
as state and local chambers and industry associations, and dedicated to promoting,
protecting, and defending America’s free enterprise system. The U.S. Chamber and the
Brazil Council greatly appreciate the opportunity to provide content for the “Global Multistakeholder
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance,” or NETmundial and looks
forward to active participation during the meeting on April 23-24.
We applaud the efforts of the Brazilian government to coordinate the engagement of a
broad group of stakeholders to discuss such an important topic.
The Internet represents one of the greatest engines for growth, providing benefits across
regions and levels of development. It is the great equalizer, providing businesses of all
sizes the opportunity to access the billions of consumers outside of their physical location
and to compete on the quality of products offered. The Internet allows consumers,
educators, and health providers alike the ability to access the best products and
technology and to share information throughout the world.
This all depends on a governance structure that is open, transparent, and representative
of all stakeholders. The current multistakeholder model approach to Internet governance
has fulfilled these needs while creating a decentralized structure that fueled rapid
development around the world.
In order to ensure that global growth and prosperity continue, we respectfully offer the
following principles to serve as a core for Internet governance:
•Policies must maintain a bottom-up approach that allows for robust and meaningful input
from all stakeholders.
•Policies must be future proof and technology neutral, able to accommodate rapidly
developing technology and different types of uses and sectors.
•Policies need to promote a voluntary, global system of standing setting.
•Policies should facilitate the stability, security, interoperability, and functionality of the
underlying network structure.
•Policies must support the seamless flow of digital services, applications, products and
information.
The roadmap for the future of Internet governance must incorporate the above policy
concerns while also maintaining its flexibility to adapt. One of the great strengths of the
inclusive governance model is the ability to nimbly and quickly address fast moving
technological changes. The future of Internet governance must avoid codifying rigid rules
or a top-down system, which only causes bottlenecking for decisions and makes it more
difficult for a wide-spectrum of stakeholders to participate freely.
By ensuring the above principles and following the suggested roadmap for future Internet
governance we can guarantee freedom of digital opportunity for generations to come. The
U.S. Chamber appreciates the consideration of this content and is happy to answer any
questions you may have.
The U.S. Chamber and the Brazil Council are at your disposal to provide additional
information and to contribute to the very important discussion about the future of Internet
Governance during your event in April in Brazil.
Yours Truly,
Renata Vasconcellos