Contribution of Telefonica to NETmundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Chistoph Steck
Region: Spain
Organization: Telefonica, S.A.
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: sustainability, level-playing, open, trust
Abstract
Telefonica believes that finding a global consensus on Internet Governance would be
crucial to restore trust and confidence of users and states in the Internet and create a
basis for a sustainable growth of the Internet. Such growth is needed to get everyone
connected to the Internet based on interconnected Internet infrastructures and networks.
Document
Contribution of Telefonica to NETmundial
March 7th, 2014
First of all, Telefónica wants to express its support for NETmundial and congratulate the
Government of Brazil for this good effort to evolve the existing model of Internet
Governance through holding a multistakeholder conference and by inviting a range of
influential other governments.
Telefónica, S.A. is an active stakeholder in the Internet Governance debate and wants
with these comments help to build a solid base for the discussions at NETmundial and to
help bridging the divergent views to make the conference a success on the way to a more
inclusive and better Internet Governance.
1. Internet Governance Principles
The electronic communications industry has made possible the unparalleled expansion of
Internet connections and penetration worldwide. A very significant proportion of total
broadband and other Internet connections are made using mobile networks, and that
growth – nurtured and stimulated by competition – is accelerating. Today, Internet users
are mainly from emerging economies and access the Internet via mobile devices, this
should also be reflected in the way the Internet is governed. To maintain this pace and
give access to those still unconnected, to be able to provide them with education, vital
medical and governmental services and open unprecedented opportunities for new job
creation and economic growth, it is crucial that Internet policy allows also
telecommunications operators to provide innovative services and encourages them to
continue to invest in new networks and infrastructure.
Competition and a regulatory and policy framework that attract investments are needed to
provide Internet for all and the necessary private investments to roll-out new
infrastructures worldwide. Also, long-term broadband and communication investments
need stable and predictable regulatory regimes, based on a level-playing field for all
actors and free from uncertainty at national and international levels. Today, the level and
intensity of regulation differs considerably between various parts of the Internet value
chain. Going forward, the sustainability of the Internet will also depend on finding a levelplaying
field for all actors across the Internet value chain.
We recognize the efforts made during the last years to define a common set of principles
for the Internet. There are already many principle documents agreed by various
international fora and institutions (OECD, G8, European Commission) regarding the
Internet.NETmundial should built on these,but focus on finding principles for the
Governance of the Internet (in contrast to: General Internet Principles), but obviously
such principles for the Governance of the Internet need to be aligned with the more
general Internet Principles.
The outcome would be a global set of Internet Governance Principles, which could serve
as a global reference point and a guiding light for all stakeholders about the Governance
of the Internet. NETmundial should try to get agreements between all stakeholders on
such a key set of governance principles that have made the Internet a global success.
Telefonica believes that this will be rather few than many principles and that they need to
capture broad consensus between all stakeholders and involved parties.
The Internet has become such a fantastic success because it was based on a governance
structure that was open to all interested stakeholders, global in reach and guided by a
cooperative spirit between all involved parties. This is a basis which is not found in any
other area of international policy and governance and should be respected simply due to
the fact that it was the basis of the growth of the Internet up to now and has overall
worked considerably well. However, the amazing growth of the Internet is putting stress
on this model of Internet Governance. While in 2005 two-thirds of all Internet users were
from the developed world, in 2015 two-thirds will stem from emerging economies. This
brings all challenges of international Public Policy to the Internet and makes its
governance more challenging due to an increased diversity of views, morals and interests.
NETmundial should therefore be an important step to evolve the Internet Governance
model by building on its existing foundations and without endangering its growth,
resilience and stability.
Telefonica believes that finding such global consensus on Internet Governance would be
crucial to restore trust and confidence of users and states in the Internet and create a
basis for a sustainable growth of the Internet. Such growth is needed to get everyone
connected to the Internet based on interconnected Internet infrastructures and networks.
Telefonica therefore believes that NETmundial should considerthe following key
principles and outcomes for the Internet and its Governance:
(1) Promote an Internet which is economically sustainable, interconnected,
secure, stable and resilient and thereby able to build confidence for all its users
globally.
(2) Protect Human Rights and fundamental principles like the rule of law for
Internet users in the same way online as they are protected offline
(3) Commit to a collaborative, inclusive and open Internet Governance where no
single stakeholder or group of stakeholder dominates but all stakeholders work
together and can engage on equal footing and in accordance with their respective
roles; this includes also governments in their recognized role as representatives of
societies for the definition of Public Policy on national and international level.
(4) Acknowledge that the current government mechanisms for technical and
operational matters of the Internet have proved to make it a remarkably stable and
resilient system and that the technical community and private sector should retain
their leading roles for the day-to-day management of a global, interconnected
Internet.
(5) Ensure that Internet Governance processes are improved and defined to be
fully transparent, inclusive and easily accessible, but also accountable for their
decisions and flexible enough to adapt to the fast-changing nature of the Internet.
2. A roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet Governance System
For Telefónica, any roadmap for the evolution of the Internet Governance System should
ensure that all affected parties are included in this process on equal footing, in their
respective roles and in an open, transparent and accessible way. We congratulate
NETmundial and the Brazilian government for their efforts to achieve this in the
organization of the conference.
We also recognize that the existing governance mechanisms and organizations dealing
with Internet Governance have worked considerably well and allowed the fantastic
development of the Internet to a global, interconnected network of networks. This by itself
gives these governance mechanism and institutions the legitimacy to be listened to and
heard in the current debate. Institutions like the I-Stars (ICANN, IETF, ISOC, etc.) and
also platforms like the UN IGF have great merits for the development of the Internet as we
know it.
Internet Governance has today developed to be a global governance model sui generis
and is much more than any other governance mechanism based on collaboration
between stakeholders. Especially private actors and technical entities lead and ensure the
day-to-day management of its core functions and do the investments needed in
infrastructure and services to create what is referred to as “The Internet”.
Telefonica believes that traditional governance models, which are based on top-down
decision making processes and multilateral agreements between governments, usually
agreed in lengthy negotiations, cannot be the most adequate for governing the fastchanging
Internet with its global reach and private, interconnected networks. However, we
also acknowledge that due to the increasingly global and diverse user base of the Internet
and its key role for the economic developments of all nations and states, Internet
Governance processes need to better involve Public Policy concerns from governments
and states and need to evolve accordingly.
Telefónica therefore believes that NETmundial should set out the areas where an
evolution of Internet Governance is deemed necessary and where there is the most
urgent need to evolve the currently existing governance mechanism. Once these areas
are defined, a roadmap to address such changes should be agreed.
We believe that this review needs to distinguish carefully between different areas and
issues of Internet Governance as not all have the same impact on Public Policy. At the
same time, not all issues need the same involvement and same set of stakeholders,
institutions and partiesto define solutions: to give an example, setting standards and
agree technical protocols for the Internet has worked considerably well under the existing
governance mechanisms which are lead by private companies and entities. However, how
to protect privacy and security of Internet users on a global level is a much more difficult
and controversial issue and has a much higher impact on Public Policy and clearly need
to involve governments in a leading role. At the same time the example of Online Privacy
also shows that it might also be necessary to distinguish between global and local (or
regional) levels, and to use the concept of subsidiarity to decide on what level decisions
need to be taken, because many national states protect already privacy online, but there
is no global agreement and protection. In general the principle of subsidiarity could be
considered to be able to determine which issues need to be solved at global level and
which ones can be dealt with by stakeholders at local levels.
Democratically-elected governments are the representatives of the people and therefore
are an important source of democratic legitimation regarding Public Policy issues affecting
the Internet. They should ensure the existence of open, inclusive and transparent
mechanisms for Internet Governance, respect Human Rights and the rule of law, and
guarantee the right policy frameworks for competitive digital markets with fair rules for all
players(level-playing-field) which are necessary to safeguard increased investments and
innovation across all layers of the commercial Internet Ecosystem. They should also
engage in relevant processes of Internet Governance and policymaking, especially when
and where there is a relevant impact on Public Policy, e.g. in issues like online privacy
and cyber-security. In such areas solutions without leading involvement of governments,
engaging with other stakeholder like the technical community, private sector, civil society
and academia, will not be possible to achieve.
The IGF has played a very important role in bringing together stakeholders. As already
proposed by the UN working group on improvements of the IGF in 2012, it should be
intended to integrate and link its outcomes better to other existing governance
mechanisms. The IGF needs to be better funded and
interactions between the global IGF and the national and regional IGFs should also be
strengthened.
Finally, due to the completely changed nature of today´s Internet, with its global usage
and with most users in the emerging world, also the key Internet resources, especially
ICANN and the IANA function, need to be globalized. The appropriate process and ways
to achieve that goal as soon as possible from a legal and technical point of view and
without endangering the stability of the Internet should be defined by NETmundial as well.