Document

 

The Argentina Internet Association (CABASE), appreciates this opportunity to participate in this important debate on Internet Governance.

 

We are pleased to submit the following principles as a positive contribution to the discussions in Sao Paulo.

 

 

 

The CABASE ten governing principles on Internet and Net Neutrality

 

1. Respect for freedom of individuals and for human rights

 

The use of the Internet must be fostered under principles of freedom of expression, access to information, privacy, free association and other recognized human rights, considering that the Internet is an essential tool for these, and for the construction of a free, just and democratic society.

 

2. Diversity

 

The cultural diversity and the plurality of individual beleifs and ideas must be respected and preserved, and their expression must be stimulated through technical innovation, discouraging the imposition of dogmas, customs or particular values in the network.

 

3. Democratic and cooperational governance and regulation

 

The governance and regulation of the diverse aspects of the Internet, must be performed in a transparent, multistakeholderl and democratic way, with the participation of the diverse sectors of society, preserving and fostering their collective creation characteristics.

 

4. Universality of access and digital inclusion

 

Access to the Internet must be universal, thus becoming a tool for human, social and economic development, and contributing to the construction of an inclusive and non-discriminatory society for the benefit of all. All people should be able to receive the necessary training that enables them to make good use of the Internet, and take advantage of all it’s possibilities.

 

5. Innovation

 

The continuous development and widespread advertising of the new information services and technologies must be fostered, in order to promote innovation and social and economic development.

 

6. The intermediaries are not responsible for the activities of the network users

 

All the measures adopted to counteract ilicit internet user activities, must be directed to the parties directly responsible for these activities, and not to the technological intermediaries who provide Internet services, always respecting the fundamental principles of freedom, privacy, lawfulness, presumption of innocence, due process and the democratic division of the public powers.

 

7. The functionality, security and stability of the network

 

The stability of the network, it’s security and global functionality must be actively preserved by means of adopting technical measures that are compatible with international standards, and encouraging the adoption of best practices.No one should have the ability to “turn off” the Internet totally or partially, in a territory and/or a specific segment of the population, and the service providers must be able to provide their services freely.

 

8. Interconnection

 

The interconnection between various Internet actors, within non-discriminatory conditions that enable guaranteed access to the network and it’s contents in all the national territory, must be promoted.

 

9. Interoperability

 

The arquitecture of the Internet and the communications systems, must be based on open standards that enable interoperability.

 

10. Juridical and standard-based environments

 

The juridical and regulatory environments must preserve the dynamics of the Internet, as an open collaborative space for all users, and must be guaranteed to remain free of blocks, interruptions, censures, interferences and surveillance.