Google Submission for NET mundial Conference
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Ross LaJeunesse
Region: USA
Organization: Google Inc.
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Internet Governance Principles, Roadmap, Stable, Secure,
Interoperable Open Internet
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Google welcomes the opportunity to submit a contribution to the Global Multistakeholder
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance (NET mundial). Our company?s mission is
to organize the world?s information and make it universally accessible and useful, and
without a secure, stable, interoperable, resilient, and open Internet, there would be no
Google. The Internet?s effects on economic growth, commerce, innovation and creativity
are unprecedented. However, despite the significant positive impact of the Internet, its
further development stands at a crossroads. The entire Internet community -- including
governments, businesses, civil society, academic and technical experts, and individual
users -- must continue working together if we want the Internet to remain an open, vibrant
platform for innovation, growth, and the free exchange of ideas, and if we want to expand
the reach of this technology to those who remain unconnected.
Document
Introduction
Google welcomes the opportunity to submit a contribution to the Global Multistakeholder
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance (NET mundial). Our company’s mission is
to organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful, and
without a secure, stable, interoperable, resilient, and open Internet, there would be no
Google.
The Internet’s effects on economic growth, commerce, innovation and creativity are
unprecedented. According to the McKinsey Global Institute, the Internet accounts for 21
percent of GDP growth in the last five years in developed countries, as well as in 30
surveyed developing countries. [1]
However, despite the significant positive impact of the Internet, its further development
stands at a crossroads. The entire Internet community -- including governments,
businesses, civil society, academic and technical experts, and individual users -- must
continue working together if we want the Internet to remain an open, vibrant platform for
innovation, growth, and the free exchange of ideas, and if we want to expand the reach of
this technology to those who remain unconnected.
Section 1: Internet Governance Principles
We believe that preserving and advancing open and consultative decision-making is
essential to ensuring that global citizens are able to take advantage of this transformative
platform both now and in the future. As such, we support the following principles:
* Policies should ensure a safe, secure, open, interoperable, and resilient Internet.
* Policies should support opening and maintaining international markets in a way that
allows for the seamless flow of digital services, applications, products, and information,
particularly across national borders.
* Policies should foster innovation.
* Policies should support capacity building and implementation of best practices in relation
to network security.
* Policies should recognize that individual human rights apply online just as they do offline.
* Policies should promote expanding access to the Internet so that it reaches all citizens
across the globe.
A governance structure that honors the substantive principles above should also
include certain procedural characteristics:
* Governance structures should be open, transparent, and accountable to all
stakeholders. All members of the Internet community -- whether individual users,
governments, civil society, businesses, and members of the academic and technical
community -- have an interest in preserving the Internet as a critical platform for
communication and information exchange, and therefore all stakeholders should be
included in governance discussions. Moreover, all of these stakeholders have contributed
to the development of the Internet to date, and working together, they have driven
unprecedented growth in access to, uses of, and innovation on the Internet. They must
continue to be involved in any future model of Internet governance.
At Google, we see these principles as a natural extension of our company’s philosophy, in
which we recognize the need to focus on Internet users first, the need for information that
crosses all borders, and the power of the web to empower global citizens.
We believe that there is broad agreement on the high level principles we have articulated
here, and we support additional work on and discussion of universal principles. The work
on establishing Internet principles should continue as an ongoing process, and
NETmundial should not measure its success or failure by agreement -- or lack thereof --
on a new, universal set of principles. Indeed, there may never be a “constitutional
moment” for the Internet, but our goal should be ensuring alignment on principles by all
stakeholders. [2]
Section 2. Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
The Current System
Because Internet governance is multifaceted -- spanning technical, political, and policy
issues -- there is no single organization that manages or has jurisdiction over all Internet
policy questions; instead, the Internet’s policies and protocols have rapidly evolved
through a set of diverse organizations. Together, a robust set of multistakeholder Internet
institutions, each with different core functions and strengths, address nearly all Internet
policy and technical issues.
A few such examples include:
* The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), which develops global standards and
protocols;
* The Internet Corporation for Assigned of Names and Numbers (ICANN), which manages
the global system for Internet naming, numbering, and addressing;
* The Internet Governance Forum (IGF), which brings together academia, governments,
civil society, and industry as a means of fostering the discussion of critical Internet issues;
and
* The Internet Society (ISOC), a technical organization, which seeks to promote the open
development, evolution, and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the
world.
While these organizations each address a significant number of issues, the Internet
governance framework’s inherent flexibility also enables issue-specific organizations to
play useful roles in addressing critical questions. A few of these specialized groups
include:
* The Messaging, Malware and Mobile Anti-Abuse Working Group and Stop Badware,
both global member-driven organization that works collaboratively to address various
forms of messaging abuse (such as spam, viruses, denial-of-service attacks and other
messaging exploitations) through industry collaboration, technology, and public policy
initiatives;
* The Forum for Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST), which brings together a
variety of computer security incident response teams from government, commercial, and
educational organizations and aims to foster cooperation and coordination in incident
prevention and incident response and to promote information sharing among members
and the community at-large;
* Global Computer Incident Response Teams (CIRTs), multistakeholder organizations
responsible for leading efforts to improve cybersecurity online, coordinate cyber
information sharing, and proactively manage cyber risks; and
* The Alliance for Affordable Internet, which brings together governments, civil society,
and the private sector to promote policy changes that enable affordable Internet access.
Today, we face two significant challenges. First, we must make the organizations that
address Internet governance questions -- whether they are technical or policy-oriented --
more inclusive and transparent while at the same time ensuring their continued
effectiveness in solving new challenges in an ever changing world. Second, we must
tackle the challenge of connecting the rest of the globe to the Internet.
Increasing Inclusivity, Transparency, and Accountability in Existing Organizations
Google has pursued a number of initiatives to improve existing Internet governance
organizations. Below we include just a few examples of such work:
* Internet Governance Forum: Google believes that the UN-chartered Internet
Governance Forum (IGF) is the premier forum for robust and inclusive debate of key
Internet governance and global Internet policy issues. It is the only forum that brings
together all stakeholders to discuss these issues. However, the IGF is at a critical stage:
it is in desperate need of consistent funding in order to continue operating, and it could be
strengthened by further improving transparency regarding its operations and broadening
its efforts to reach new stakeholders. We support efforts to ensure the IGF’s sustainability
and to improve its inclusivity, transparency, and accountability.
* Facilitating discussions between policymakers and the technical community: Google
supports meetings of regional operators groups (e.g., AfNOG, MENOG), regional Internet
registries (e.g., AfriNIC) and regional peering and interconnection fora (AfPIF). We have
also worked with the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to make it easier for
regulators from across the globe to participate in IETF meetings and better understand
the bottom up, multi-stakeholder process of Internet standards development.
Expanding Internet Access
Google is committed to working with all stakeholders on the technology, policy, and
business solutions for improving Internet access. We have made significant investments
in a number of areas.
* Innovative solutions for increasing broadband access and decreasing its cost: There is
no single technology or platform that will achieve global connectivity, and we are working
on several different projects. Project Loon, our early-stage effort to deliver broadband via
high-altitude balloons, is one of many exploratory initiatives aimed at connecting remote
and hard-to-reach localities. We have also invested in Project Link, a fiber network in
Kampala, Uganda, that aims to improve Internet access by connecting existing, local
networks to the undersea cables that, in turn, connect the Internet between continents.
Similarly, Google has long advocated that unused channels in the television broadcast
spectrum -- called “white spaces” -- be used to deliver low-cost broadband in unserved
and underserved areas. To that end, we have developed a database to make this
spectrum available for the transmission of broadband.
* The African School on Internet Governance: Last July, Google sponsored the first
African School on Internet Governance in Durban, South Africa. The School brought
together government officials, technical experts, academics and business leaders, and
highlighted the inherent power of the multi-stakeholder model by incorporating all these
views in the development of strategies for using the Internet as a platform for economic,
social, political, and cultural development.
* Driving demand for locally relevant content: Online content drives Internet adoption. To
that end, we have worked with local businesses across the globe to help them establish
an online presence. Not only does this effort contribute to locally relevant content, it allows
small businesses to grow their revenues by expanding to a broader, potentially global,
audience. We have also made significant achievements in localizing Google content for
national audiences: for example, in Africa alone, we have developed localized country
domains for over 30 countries and provide content in 37 languages. In addition, we have
expended considerable efforts to put the world’s cultural treasures online with such
initiatives as the Google Cultural Institute, which has put the collections of over 400
leading museums online to date.
We offer these illustrative examples as ways that we are tackling two critical challenges
facing the Internet community. Of course, it will take more work in the coming months and
years from a variety of stakeholders to order to meet these challenges.
The Path Forward
There has never been a single road, no single “one stop shop” for Internet governance;
instead, there are are multiple organizations and actors that all contribute to Internet
governance development. The Internet’s rules have rapidly evolved in diverse
organizations like the IETF, which cooperates on the development of open standards, or
ICANN, which manages naming and addressing. Of course, governments are heavily
involved in regulating the Internet through regulations addressing privacy, fair use, libel,
competition, and other matters. The technology community is spread across many sectors
and its work creates implicit and sometimes explicit bounds on behavior. And many
individuals and civil society organizations engage to provide independent perspectives on
behalf of users. These are just a few examples, and amazingly, all these groups
collaborate with each other to set collective rules for the advancement of the Internet
ecosystem.
In sum, the Internet governance ecosystem is complex in a way that reflects the social,
political, and business contentions of the world in which we live. One of the early heads of
the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), David Clark (with others) summarized some of the
governance challenges by observing that “as the Internet becomes mainstream it
inevitably moves from being an engineering curiosity to being a mirror of the societies in
which it operates.” This is even more true today.
The Internet community does not lack for places to discuss key Internet policy and
governance questions. Rather, a critical concern voiced by some stakeholders is that the
rubric of organizations and overlapping missions is confusing and difficult to navigate
without considerable time and effort. While these concerns are valid, they do not
necessarily counsel in favor of directing all Internet policy discussions into one body.
Rather, we must find a way to take advantage of the richness of the ecosystem while
making it easier to navigate, especially for new entrants.
As such, as Internet policy discussions continue to evolve, we believe stakeholders
should continue to rely on the existing structures to develop global policies that benefit all
users rather than relying on either the creation of another governance body or on
multilateral approaches. To make the processes easier to navigate, we believe that one
way to approach to the development of a “roadmap” requires us look at the map through
the lens of the Internet’s technical architecture. In particular, the Internet’s “layered
model” provides a way to understand the ecosystem. The technical layer deals with the
Internet’s infrastructure, standards, routing protocols. On top of the technical layer are the
content and social layers, within which the applications and services of the Internet are
found. Although there are different ways to think about the layered system, we believe
the conceptualization of the Internet in these layers helps provide a basis for a discussion
about which institutions and stakeholder groups should be involved in which Internet
policy issues, and within which “layers” they operate. [3]
The whole Internet ecosystem is likely to benefit from mapping the existing Internet
governance institutions and clarifying their roles as stewards for particular Internet
governance practices and policy-making. Doing so can also help identify the areas or
issues that are not yet addressed within the ecosystem and help identify areas that
require further attention.
Conclusion
We look forward to the opportunity to discuss these proposals and others with
representatives from governments, the private sector, civil society, and the technical
community in Sao Paulo. And, we look forward to working together with all stakeholders
in moving toward a shared goal: continued, robust growth of an open Internet that enables
economic development, cultural advancement, and the free exchange of ideas and
information to every nation and person on the globe.
-------
Footnotes
[1] Internet Matters: The net’s sweeping impact on growth, jobs, and prosperity, available
at
http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/Technology_and_Innovation/Internet_matters.
[2] SeeVinton G. Cerf (Chair) et al., “ICANN’s Role in the Internet Governance
Ecosystem,” Report of the ICANN Strategy Panel, February 20, 2014, available at
http://goo.gl/D60sJw.
[3] For further detailed on the layered model in policymaking, see Cerf/Ryan/Senges,
“Internet Governance is our Shared Responsibility, available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2309772 and Whitt, “A Deference to Protocol,” available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2031186.