ETNO contribution to NetMundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Caroline Greer
Region: Belgium
Organization: ETNO [European Telecommunications Network Operators'
Association]
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords:
Abstract
ETNO, a leading European trade association representing forty of the largest electronic
communications operators, welcomes the opportunity to provide input to the NetMundial
meeting. The Brazil gathering is an excellent occasion to bring together all actors in the
Internet governance space to discuss how best we can evolve the global governance
model for the benefit of all, by building on its existing foundations and without endangering
its growth, resilience and stability. We find it extremely encouraging that this debate will
be based on a multi-stakeholder approach and will be held in an open and transparent
manner, and we applaud the Brazilian Government for its leadership in organizing this
meeting. Having been actively involved in the Internet governance debate across many
different fora for many years, ETNO looks forward to contributing to this particular
discussion.
Document
Internet Governance Principles
ETNO fully supports the move towards a universal set of principles on Internet
governance and for the NetMundial conference to address such an initiative.
The process to conclude such a framework will undoubtedly be complex, as such
principles may reflect values and values across different cultures tend to vary, however
we see the process of developing a global set of principles as being an important step
towards understanding the various stakeholderneeds and issues that we see emerging
today. Although many argue that there can be no one global framework for the Internet
nor one defined set of rules/norms, it is also the case that this lack of a normative
reference architecture also significantly weakens any arguments against certain
behaviours and can frustrate any debate around how to move forward with improvements.
As constituents in different parts of the world grapple with current policy issues, different
answers may emerge depending on different reference frameworks. One of the goals of
the Brazil meeting should be recognition that these principles should be shared and
considered as common principles by all stakeholders of the meeting.
ETNO believes that NetMundial should build on work that has been carried out by
organisations such as the OECD and the European Commissionbut that the primary focus
in Brazil should be on establishing Principles for the Governance of the Internet
as opposed to General Internet Principles. This is an important difference that we wish to
underline. Moreover, ‘few rather than many’ principles should be the guideline, if
NetMundial wishes to see success and acknowledging the complexity of the task that we
have before us. Global consensus on Internet Governance principles will be critically
important for the restoration of trust and confidence of Internet users and to allow for the
continued growth of the Internet.
Against this background, ETNO suggests the following as guiding Internet governance
principles:
1. The global Internet governance modelshould involve all necessary stakeholders
on an equal footing and in accordance with their respective roles. Reflecting the
societal importance of the Internet, it is recognised that Governments have a role,
as representatives of society, in the elaboration of Internet public policy.
2. Internet Governance processes should be transparent, inclusive and accessible and
all actors must be held accountable for their decisions.
3. The Internet should be economically sustainable, interconnected, safe, resilient and
secure.
4. Respect for human rights and fundamental principles, such as privacy and security,
are of paramount importance and the same rule of law should apply online as it
does offline.
Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Model: Roadmap
ETNO believes that the roles and responsibilities of each participating Internet
governance organisation and process should be made clear and, to the greatest extent
possible, not be over-lapping. No one governance body should be seen as competing with
another and all parts can be equal in contributing to the global Internet governance
debate. We should have the ambition to have a system that clarifies which organisation
has the authority to act on which subject matter, or which organisations collaborate with
each other, and we believe this to be an important step in the roadmapping process.
We also draw attention to the the European Commission’s plans to launch the Global
Internet Policy Observatory (GIPO), which will serve as a valuable resource on Internet
policy/regulation, actors and and technology, and better enable emerging economies in
particular to engage on Internet governance and policy matters.
Democratically-elected governments are the representatives of the people and therefore
their role in the development of public policy must be recognised. When it comes to high
impact public policy issues such as the protection of privacy and the security of Internet
users, Governments arguably have a leading role to play in navigating the debate with
their citizens. However, in other areas such as standards setting and the development of
technical protocols, the private sector should continue to take the lead. The checks and
balances for such a governance model should come from a multi-stakeholder
accountability mechanism for all actors involved in any decision making process.
Whilst the US Government’s oversight of the IANA functions has been a suitable model to
date, ETNO believes that the ever increasing globalization of the Internet needs to be
reflected in appropriate governance mechanism and institutions. A central part of that
debate between all relevant stakeholders needs to be the question around whether the
IANA functions should continue to be subject to an US Government procurement contract.
ETNO very much welcomed the Montevideo Statement on the Future of Internet
Cooperation which calls for “accelerating the globalization of ICANN and IANA functions,
towards an environment in which all stakeholders, including all governments, participate
on an equal footing.” As such, we believe this to be an important topic for discussion in
Brazil. Notwithstanding the need to consider a new model, ETNO also recognises the
importance of continuing to ensure the stability and security of the Internet and the need
for any alternative options to guarantee same.
Finally, and as business representatives, our primary interest is be to ensure that no new
barriers to the growth of the Internet as a global platform for economic and social
development are introduced as a result of the NetMundial discussions. Any outcomes of
the Brazil meeting should seek to foster the continued development of the Internet and
recognise its dynamic nature.