Internet Universality: A Means Towards Building Knowledge
Societies and the Post-2015 Sustainable Development
Agenda
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Guy Berger
Region: France
Organization: UNESCO
Sector: Other
Keywords: Internet Universality, Human Rights, Openness, Accessibility,
Multi-stakeholder
Abstract
This submission, proposed by UNESCO?s Secretariat, introduces ?Internet Universality?,
a draft concept that summarizes UNESCO?s positions on the Internet and which also
serves as the framework for a current comprehensive study by UNESCO concerning key
Internet-related issues. The notion of ?Internet Universality? can holistically highlight the
continued conditions for progress towards Knowledge Societies and the elaboration of the
Post-2015 Sustainable Development Agenda. The word ?Universality? points to four
fundamental principles that have been embodied in the broad norms of evolution of the
universal dimensions of the Internet. These principles are (i) that the Internet is Human
Rights-based (ii) ?Open?, (iii) ?Accessible to All?, and (iv) nurtured by Multi-stakeholder
Participation. The participants of NETmundial are invited to consider this draft concept as
part of their deliberations and provide feedback to UNESCO.
Document
1. Why a concept of “Internet Universality”?[1]
UNESCO has long recognized that the Internet has enormous potential to bring the world
closer to peace, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty.[2]As an
international intergovernmental organization that operates with a global remit and
promotes values that are universal, UNESCO has a logical connection to the Internet’s
“universality”. This “universality” can be understood as the common thread that runs
through four key social dimensions pertaining to the Internet, namely the extent to which
this facility is based on universal norms of being: (i) Human Rights-based (and therefore
free); (ii) Open; (iii) Accessible to All; and (iv) Multi-stakeholder Participation. The four
norms can be summarized by the mnemonic R – O – A – M (Rights, Openness, A
ccessibility, Multi-stakeholder).
Various stakeholders have characterized the Internet according to what they perceive as
its essential features, highlighting one or other aspects such as freedom of expression,
open architecture, security issues, online ethics, etc.[3] What this range of
conceptualizations illustrates is both the diversity of concerns and interests, as well as the
multi-faceted character of the Internet itself. In turn, this prompts the question as to the
possibility of understanding how the various considerations and dimensions relate to each
other and to the wider whole. As a method to conceptualize this bigger picture, UNESCO
is now canvassing the concept of “Internet Universality”, which could serve as a
macro-concept. The purpose is tocapture the enduring essentials of the vast, complex
and evolving Internet, and which facilitates a comprehensive understanding of where and
how different parties, and especially UNESCO, relate to the Internet. The concept could
particularly serve as an enabling perspective in the context of the increasing centrality of
Internet to societies, and specifically the increasing “Internetization” of education, the
sciences, culture and communication-information.
As well as identifying four distinctive principles and norms that have special interest to
UNESCO, the concept of “Internet Universality” groups these under a single integrated
heading in a way that affords recognition of their mutually reinforcing and interdependent
character. Without such a comprehensive intellectual device, it would otherwise be hard to
grasp interconnections amongst UNESCO’s Internet-related work and how it contributes
to Knowledge Societies and the Post-2015 Sustainable Development Agenda.
As regards UNESCO’s involvement in global debates, the concept of “Internet
Universality” can be considered for its potential as a unifying, consolidated and
comprehensive framework. On the one hand, it highlights the freedom and human rights
principles as shared by those existing notions such as “Internet freedom”; on the other
hand, it also provides an umbrella to address the intertwined issues of access and use, as
well as the matters of technical and economic openness. In addition, the concept also
encompasses multi-stakeholder engagement as an integral component. In this inclusive
way, the “Internet Universality” concept can therefore be a bridging and foresighted
framework for dialogue between North and South and among different stakeholders. As
such, it could also make a unique contribution to shaping global Internet governance
discourse and the post-2015 Sustainable Development Agenda.
2. Unpacking the concept of “Internet Universality”
The linking of four normative components of the “universality” of the Internet builds closely
upon prior UNESCO thinking about the Internet which includes:
- Recommendation on the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to
Cyberspace (2003).[4] (This document particularly points to the accessibility norm, as well
as the need to balance rights).
- Reflection and Analysis by UNESCO on the Internet (2011).[5] (This document highlights
normative work in relation to UNESCO’s programmes, and multi-stakeholder participation).
- Final Recommendations of WSIS+10 review event, and the Final Statement of the
WSIS+10 review event (2013) which was endorsed by UNESCO member states at their
General Conference in 2013.[6] (These documents cover rights, access, openness, and
multi-stakeholder issues).
- UNGIS (UN Group on the Information Society) Joint Statement on the Post-2015
Sustainable Development Agenda (2013).[7] (This document highlights the importance of
the social conditions for Information and Communication Technologies in general, and the
Internet in particular, to contribute to inclusive Knowledge Societies).
“Internet Universality” integrates a range of existing UNESCO insights and shows the link
between the Internet and what UNESCO has already recognized[8] as the underlying key
principles of Knowledge Societies: freedom of expression, quality education for all,
universal access to information and knowledge, and respect for cultural and linguistic
diversity. In this way, the concept highlights what is needed for the Internet to be a means
towards achieving Knowledge Societies. It serves as a heuristic to highlight that the
Internet’s character and utility entail technical, social, legal, economic and other
arrangements which in turn depend on particular norms that underpin the positive
potentiality of this facility. Considered in more depth, the R – O – A – M norms constitutive
of “Internet Universality” (Rights, Openness, Accessibility, Multi-stakeholder) can be
understood as follows:
(i) By identifying the Internet’s connection to Human Rights-based norms as
constituents of freedom, “Internet Universality” helps to emphasize continued harmony
between the growth and use of the Internet and human rights. A free Internet in this
sense means one that respects and enables the freedom to exercise human rights.[9] In
this regard, “Internet Universality” enjoins us to consider the gamut of interdependencies
and inter-relationships between different human rights and the Internet – such as freedom
of expression, privacy, cultural participation, gender equality, association, security,
education, etc.
(ii) “Internet Universality” also highlights the norm of the Internet based on the
principle of Openness. This designation recognizes the importance of technological
issues such as open standards, as well as standards of open access to knowledge and
information. Openness also signals the importance of ease of entry of actors and the
absence of closure that might otherwise be imposed through monopolies.
(iii) Accessible to All as a principle-based norm for “Internet Universality” raises
issues of technical access and availability, as well as digital divides such as based on
economic income and urban-rural inequalities. Thus it points to the importance of norms
around universal access to minimum levels of connectivity infrastructure. At the same
time, “accessibility” requires engaging with social exclusions from the Internet based on
factors such as literacy, language, class, gender, and disability. Further, understanding
that people access the Internet as producers of content, code and applications, and not
just as consumers of information and services, the issue of user competencies is part of
the accessibility dimension of “Universality”. This highlights UNESCO’s notion of Media
and Information Literacy which enhances accessibility by empowering Internet users to
engage critically, competently and ethically.
(i) The Internet in this sense cannot only be seen from the “supply side”, but needs
a complimentary “user-centric” perspective. The Participatory, and specifically the
Multi-stakeholder engagement, dimension of “Internet Universality” facilitates sensemaking
of the roles that different agents (representing different sectors as well as different
social and economic status, and not excluding women and girls) have played, and need to
continue to play, in developing and governing the Internet on a range of levels.
Participation is essential to the value that the facility can have for peace, sustainable
development and poverty eradication. In bridging contesting stakeholder interests,
participative mechanisms contribute to shared norms that mitigate abuses of the Internet.
“Universality” here highlights shared governance of the Internet.
These norms for these four aspects are distinct, but they also reinforce each other. Rights
without accessibility would be limited to the few; accessibility without rights would stunt
the potential of access. Openness allows for sharing and innovation, and it complements
respect for rights and accessibility. Multi-stakeholder participation helps guarantee the
other three norms. Overall, an Internet that falls short of respecting human rights,
openness, accessibility or multi-stakeholder participation would by definition be far less
than universal.
3. How the concept of “Internet Universality” is relevant to UNESCO
UNESCO has a unique role in promoting “Internet Universality”. It is the UN agency with a
mandate that spans social life at large and, within this, has programs that involve the
Internet in education, culture, science, social sciences and communication-information.
By using “Internet Universality” as an umbrella concept, UNESCO can position more
specific concerns such as mobile learning, education for girls, cultural and linguistic
diversity, media and information literacy, research into climate change, freedom of
expression, universal access to information, bioethics and social inclusion, etc. In this
way, “Internet Universality” can also support the priorities of Gender Equality and Africa. It
can serve as an over-arching, integrating framework for Internet-related work across
UNESCO, establishing a common frame of reference for all. Operationally the concept
can elevate a range of work to the status of initiatives that jointly advance “Internet
Universality”. It can encourage synergies and inter-sectoral co-operation and joint
programming. In particular, the concept can enhance understanding of the mid-term
strategy of 2014-2021 (37/C4) and the quadrennial program (37/C5).
4. Conclusion
“Internet Universality” accords with the Organization’s service to the wider international
community in the following respects:
Laboratory of ideas, including foresight – elaborating the concept is
directly relevant to UNESCO’s creative and think-tank potential;
By stimulating global debate, “Internet Universality” illustrates how
UNESCO can be a catalyst for international cooperation, with a holistic
and inclusive approach.
Standard-setter – if the concept gained traction broadly, it could inform the
development of standards for monitoring progress in “Internet Universality”
As a normative framework that can inform policies, and draw in public and
private, civil society and decision-makers, “Internet Universality” can help
UNESCO fulfill its role as a capacity-builder in Member States.
Looking ahead, “Internet Universality” could follow in the footsteps of previous influential
intellectual work by UNESCO such as the concepts of “Intangible cultural heritage” and
“Knowledge Societies”. Because “Internet Universality” represents an updated
conceptualization of the era, the concept could become a valuable contribution to the
global discussion about this complex and dynamic human creation and serve to enhance
Internet’s continued contribution to humanity’s shared future.
[1] An integral version of this paper is online at
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/resources/news-and-infocus-
articles/allnews/
news/open_consultation_on_unesco_new_concept_internet_universality/
[2] For example: “Reflection and Analysis by UNESCO on the Internet: UNESCO and the
use of Internet in its domains of competence”
(2011).http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/ED/ICT/pdf/useinternetdomains.pdf
[3] For example, there have been different emphases at the Stockholm Forum, the
Freedom Online Coalition on Cyberspace, Wilton Park, and the London and Budapest
conferences on Cyberspace. Similarly, the Internet has been analyzed diversely by
international organizations. Examples here are: the Council of Europe’s “
Recommendation CM/Rec(2011)8 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the
protection and promotion of the universality, integrity and openness of the Internet”
(2011), the OECD Council Recommendation on Principles for Internet Policy Making
(2011), the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media Recommendations from the
Internet 2013 Conference (2013); the ICC Policy Statement on “The freedom of
expression and the free flow of information on the Internet”, and the Internet Rights and
Principles Coalition’s “Internet Rights & Principles Charter” (2010).
[4]http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/about-us/how-wework/
strategy-and-programme/promotion-and-use-of-multilingualism-and-universalaccess-
to-cyberspace/
[5] http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0019/001920/192096e.pdf;
[6] Documents from the First WSIS+10 Review Event, “Towards Knowledge Societies for
Peace and Sustainable Development”, Paris 25-27 February, 2013:
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/wsis/WSIS_10_Event/wsis10_recommendations_;
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/wsis/WSIS_10_Event/wsis10_final_statement_[7]
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/wsis/ungis_joint_statement_wsis_2013.pdf
[8] Reflection and Analysis by UNESCO on the Internet,
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0019/001920/192096e.pdf
[9] In this manner, “Internet Universality” accords with the Report of UN Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression and also echoes the first resolution on “promotion, protection and enjoyment
of human rights on the Internet” passed by UN Human Rights Council in 2012.