The Relevance of Free Software to ensure Internet Freedoms
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Satish Babu
Region: India
Organization: International Centre for Free and Open Source Software
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: Internet Freedoms, Free Software, FOSS, Free-Libre-Open-
Source-Software
Abstract
There is increasing acceptance, around the world, of the principle that that the Internet is
a universal global resource that should be free of restrictive controls in order to for it to be
utilized by communities and individuals around the world. Further, there is also an
emerging consensus in many parts of the world that that the most effective way to govern
this global resource is through the multistakeholder model. This submission argues that in
order to ensure that the Internet Freedoms are preserved, it is important to ensure that
Open Standards are followed, and reference implementations based on Free, Libr and
Open Source Software--which is software owned, developed and maintained by
communities--are available as a choice for every Standard and Protocol used on the
Internet. Only this measure will ensure that Internet Freedoms remain inviolate
irrespective of efforts by governments, lobbies, or corporates.
Document
All use of the Internet is intermediated by software--it is impossible to use the Internet
without using software. While most of us agree about the need for the Internet to be Free,
little attention is paid to the need for the software and protocols of the Interent to be Free
as well.
The emergence and mainstreaming, in the last two decades, of Free, Libré and Open
Source Software (FLOSS or FOSS) as a distinct model of production, consumption,
distribution and maintenance of software--in contrast to the Proprietary/Closed Source
Software (PCSS) model--shows that the values that underpin it are sound and acceptable
to communities around the world.
There is general acceptance today that a global resource such as the Internet should be
governed by Open Standards vis-à-vis its underlying protocols. This submission argues
that this need for Open Standards is necessary but not sufficient, and that every Open
Standard must have reference implementations that are FOSS-based, and further, that
wherever possible, FOSS-based software implementations should be given preference
over PCSS-based software.
Apart from other important quality parameters--such as robustness, low-cost, extensibility,
customizability, security, auditability, and less restrictive licenses--a key differentiator for
FOSS-based software is that it upholds Freedoms--of developers, users, communities
and nations--and is consequently a more ethical alternative than PCSS. Thus, FOSS is a
natural fit in the context of preserving Internet Freedoms.
Therefore, any discussion on Internet Governance is incomplete without FLOSS, and
users at large would benefit from utilizing FOSS-based software, at least for reference
implementations, but even better, for all applications on the Internet.