Submission by AHCIET to the Global Multistakeholder
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance. NETMundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Pablo Bello
Region: Latin America
Organization: AHCIET
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Integrity, robustness and resiliency of the network, human
rights, globalization, security;
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
AHCIET wants to express its support for NETMundial and congratulate the Government of
Brazil for this big effort to evolve the existing model of Internet Governance and
appreciates the opportunity to submit a contribution to this relevant meeting. Latin
American telecom operators are working hard developing and delivering Internet thorough
the region and they want to enhance the cooperation with the other stakeholders
contributing to the discussions towards the evolution of Internet Governance model
Document
Submission by AHCIET to the Global Multistakeholder Meeting
on the Future of Internet Governance. NETMundial
AHCIET wants to express its support for NETMundial and congratulate the Government of
Brazil for this big effort to evolve the existing model of Internet Governance and
appreciates
the opportunity to submit a contribution to this relevant meeting.
Latin American telecom operators are working hard developing and delivering Internet
thorough the region and they want to enhance the cooperation with the other stakeholders
contributing to the discussions towards the evolution of Internet Governance model.
We want to recognize the current channels of discussion established in the context of
Internet
Governance to date, the consolidated Internet Governance Forum (IGF) with their
regional and
national branches and the recently created Global Commission on Internet Governance
(GCIG).
AHCIET (Latin American Association of Research Centers and Telecommunication
Enterprises) is
a non-profit, private organization founded in 1982. It represents the business interests of
50
Information and Communications Technologies companies from all over Latin America.
The Association’s mission is to serve as a platform that facilitates dialogue between the
public and
private sector e.g., (international organizations, regulators and governmental authorities.),
in
order to foster alliances and initiatives resulting in the development of policies, programs
and
projects that leverage economic and social development of regional economies
Internet Governance Principles.
AHCIET proposes the following items for consideration to the discussion regarding
Principles for
Internet Governance:
1. Respect and protect the Universal Human Rights and the fundamental principle that
the people has the same rights online and offline.
o Internet governance arrangements must ensure the protection of all
fundamental human rights and freedoms and affirm their universality, indivisibility,
interdependence and interrelation in accordance with International Human Rights
Law.
2. We support an evolved global, collaborative, diverse and inclusive Internet governance
model, building on existing foundations and with the involvement of all relevant
stakeholders (including industry, governments, the technical community, civil society
and academia) on an equal footing and in an open, transparent, efficient and
collaborative manner. This model should respect the changing nature of the Internet.
o The current global nature of the Internet has brought social and economic
benefit to users all around the world.
o Any proposed changes to the current governance model, have to take into
account that the principles of flexibility and agility should be applied and that all
relevant stakeholders are represented appropriately.
o The strength of the current model is based in the Internet technical
infrastructure, provided from different entities working in a collaborative way, and
its ability to adapt the standards and protocols to changing technologies and user
requirements. In the evolution of the governance model is necessary to maintain
that key principle.
o The Internet governance system must avoid the “primus inter pares” relations,
especially when countries are involved.
3. The current Internet model has proved to be a useful and effective tool for diffusion
and interchange of knowledge, being an obvious incentive to the development of the
global economy. Any proposed technical or operational change affecting the core
Internet activities, including naming and numbering, has to preserve the integrity of
the network as well as its robustness, resiliency, security and stability. In the other
side, any proposal to localize the Internet and its governance will affect the operational
and economics of the current Internet, and could act as a barrier to the growth itself
and undermining socio-economic benefits.
4. We recognize that the current government mechanisms for technical and operational
matters of the Internet have proved to make it a remarkably stable and resilient
system and that the technical community and private sector should retain their leading
roles for the day-to-day management of the global, interconnected Internet.
5. Issues should be resolved with due process in a clear and transparent way
6. AHCIET support the process of globalization of ICANN and IANA functions and we
believe that this task must be accelerated with a clear roadmap.
Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance
Ecosystem.
Due to the growing diversity of the Internet and its huge social and economic impact, its
governance has become more challenging and an issue of international politics.
AHCIET proposes the following for consideration to the discussion regarding Roadmap for
the
Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem:
1. Ahciet is aware that the existing mechanisms and organizations dealing with Internet
Governance have worked in a good manner allowing the tremendous development
achieved by the Internet, so we are of the opinion that there is no need to create new
institutions or a global governing body for the Internet.
2. The current multistakeholder fora such as the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), the
IETF and ICANN should be strengthened in order to reflect the changing nature and
various aspects of Internet governance. AHCIET believes that the multistakeholder
model is the best way to govern the Internet but that it needs to evolve and be
improved. An analysis of the work of existing multistakeholder fora should be carried
out with a view to streamlining processes identifying overlapping areas where they
exist and eliminating duplication.
3. The current status of ICANN/IANA should be changed gradually, the initiated
globalization process is a good way to go forward in this sense it has to be
strengthened and accelerated with a clear roadmap. Therefore, in line with the recent
Montevideo Statement on the Future of Internet Cooperation1, we are in favor of this
process leading to an environment in which all stakeholders, including all
Governments, participate on equal footing.
4. All stakeholders, including governments, should work together in transparent processes
to make sure that everyone can use the Internet with confidence that his or her security
and privacy is respected, in this sense, the Internet Governance Forum has played a
very important role, have been successful and become more diverse and international
It could be better funded and its role and influence expanded.
5. AHCIET is the opinion that the roadmap should work clarifying the legitimate
involvement of Governments in Internet governance debates, we could support a
model whereby Governments are involved, as an equal player, in high-impact Internet
public policy issues such as; cybersecurity, critical infrastructure debates and
societal/development debates, in this sense the IGF could be the appropriate
framework.
o We recognize that there are some Internet-related issues, such as privacy and
security, where governments have an especially important role to play.
o The role of the Governmental Advisory Group (GAC) at the ICANN could be
strength and clarified.
6. The roadmap should also seek to clarify the roles of civil society and business
(telecomm operators).
o Civil society involvement is warranted in areas touching upon civil rights and
consumer issues
o Telecom operators should be involved in any discussions affecting their core
infrastructure.
1
See : http://www.lacnic.net/en/web/anuncios/2013-declaracion-montevideo