Core Internet Governance Principles and a Roadmap
Towards Guaranteeing the Freedom of Digital Opportunity
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Adam Schlosser
Region: United States
Organization: U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Internet Governance Principles Jobs Growth
Abstract
The Internet represents one of the greatest engines for growth, providing benefits across
regions and levels of development. It allows a full spectrum of end users the ability to
access the best products and technology and to share information throughout the world,
regardless of geographical location. By following a roadmap towards ensuring core
principles of Internet Governance we can guarantee this freedom of digital opportunity for
generations to come.
Document
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is the world's largest business federation representing
the intersts of more than three million businesses of all sizes, sectors, and regions, as well
as state and local chambers and industry associations, and dedicated to promoting
protecting, and defending the free enterprise system. Established in 1976, the U.S.
Section of the Brazil-U.S. Business Council is the premier business advocacy
organization dedicated to strengthening the economic and commercial relationship
between Brazil and the United States, representing for than 100 of the top U.S.
companies with investments in Brazil. The Chamber and the Brazil Council greatly
appreciate the opportunity to provide content for the "Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on
the Future of Internet Governance," or NETmundial and look forward to active
participation during the meeting on April 23-24.
We applaud the efforts of the Brazilian government to coordinate the engagement of a
broad group of stakeholders to discuss such an important topic. Our members operate
and invest in every corner of the globe, leveraging the Internet to provide valuable
benefits to all types of end users.
The Internet represents one of the greatest engines for growth, providing benefits across
regions and levels of development. It is the great equalizer, providing businesses of all
sizes the opportunity to access the billions of consumers outside of their physical location
and to compete on the quality of products offered. The Internet allows consumers,
educators, and health providers alike the ability to access the best products and
technology and to share information throughout the world.
This all depends on a governance structure that is open, transparent, and representative
of al stakeholders. The current multistakeholder model approach to Internet governance
has fulfilled these needs while creating a decentralized structure that fueled rapid
development around the world.
In order to ensure that global growth and prosperity continue, we respectfully offer the
following principles to serve as a core for Internet governance:
* Policies must maintain a bottom-up approach that allows for robust and meaningful input
from all stakeholders.
* Policies must be future proof and technology neutral, able to accomodate rapidly
developing technology and different types of uses and sectors.
* Policies need to promote a voluntary, industry-led, global system of standard setting.
* Policies should facilitate the stability, security, interoperability, and functionality of the
underlying network structure.
* Policies must support the seamless flow of digital services, appliations, products, and
information.
The roadmap for the future of Internet governance must incorporate the above policy
concerns while also maintaining the flexiblity to adapt. One of the great strengths of the
inclusive governance model is the ability to nimbly and quickly address fast moving
technological changes. The future of Internet governance must avoid codifying rigid rules
or moving towards a top-down system, which only causes bottlenecking for decisions and
makes it more difficult for a wide-spectrum of stakeholders to participate freely.
By ensuring the above principles and following the suggested roadmap for future Internet
governance we can guarantee freedom of digital opportunity for generations to come. The
Chamber appreciates the consideration of this content and is happy to answer any
questions. We are at your disposal to provide additional information and look forward to
contributing to the very important discussion in April.