Document

 
Internet Governance Principles

The Spanish Internet Governance Forum welcomes the opportunity of contributing to the ongoing debate on a set of Internet Governance Principles. The set of principles proposed in this document have been taken from the messages of the last Spanish IGF meeting in Madrid, in which all stakeholders were involved.

 

1.     Multistakeholder governance. The multistakeholder governance model provides a more benefits on its attempt to guarantee a free, open and innovating Internet, than those potentially obtained through other governance schemes based on the unilateral participation of states or enterprises.

2.     One single and non-fragmented network. The global nature of the Internet must be recognized and we should aim at providing universal access through open standards that allow interoperability.

3.     Sustainable Internet. It is necessary to maintain feasible business models for all players in the value chain of the Internet that allows long-term sustainability.

4.     Freedom and human rights. The use of the Internet must be driven by the principles of freedom of expression and the respect for human rights. The same principles as applied offline.

5.     Cybersecurity. It is necessary to reinforce security in the Internet, in particular the protection of minors e.g. against cyber-bullying.

6.     Open governance. Internet governance must be exercised in a transparent, open, inclusive and accountable manner.

7.      Empowerment of the Internet users. Access to information should be allowed when it is still possible to participate or influence in the procedure. Users must be able to exercise their rights and freedoms.

8.     Privacy. An important goal should be to achieve a regulatory balance through a harmonized regulation able to provide similar answers to similar situations throughout every country, as well as to protect citizens’ rights, wherever the service provider is established.

9.     Accessibility. Universal access to the Internet should be promoted, providing both access to the network as well as developing digital skills for all users, independently from their age, building or financial circumstances.

10.  More active role of Europe in Internet Governance. We must seek for ways to allow convergence and fluent decision making within the European Union, which allow all interested stakeholder assume a more active role regarding internet governance.