Document

 

EuroISPA, the European Association of Internet Services Providers (ISPs), welcomes the opportunity to provide comments to the “Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance”. EuroISPA is the world’s largest association of ISPs representing the interests of more than 1800 companies across the EU and the EFTA countries. 

 

 

 

Our member companies are actively engaged to ensure an open, stable, secure, resilient, and interoperable Internet.  We believe that a healthy, vibrant, stable, effective, and pluralistic Internet governance system is essential, and that all stakeholders with a role in developing, maintaining, or using the Internet must be able to participate in, and impact on decisions that would affect them or the Internet. For this reason EuroISPA is actively involved in governance discussions taking place in constituencies such as ICANN, IGF, EuroDIG, Council of Europe, ITU and OECD.

 

 

 

EuroISPA considers that the global structure of the Internet must be preserved. Any approach which aims to find an agreement harmonising Internet laws around the world or concluding a binding international treaty risks dividing, rather than uniting, States given the impact Internet produces on the social, economic, cultural and legal dimensions in each country. We believe that NETmundial has the potential to strengthen national and global governance around a set of high level principles respectful of the rule of law and fundamental freedoms.

 

 

 

EuroISPA considers that NETmundial is not an end in itself but only a starting point towards a long term dialogue on what Internet Governance is.

 

 

 

As a consequence, EuroISPA would like discussions at the NETmundial to focus on the following key points:

 

§  Common understanding of Internet Governance: Internet Governance as a subject should be narrowly defined. A clear distinction needs to be established between the core governance issues and the wider set of areas containing an Internet dimension. The network and data that it carries are in fact entirely separate at the level of policy (and are to be treated as such)

 

§  Existing governance arrangements should be improved and not replaced

 

§  Technology can assist in implementing solutions, but regulating technology per se is not the solution to social or political challenges