Supporting Experimentation in the Decentralization of
Internet Resources
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Eli Dourado
Region: USA
Organization: The Mercatus Center at George Mason University
Sector: Academia
Keywords: peer-to-peer, DNS, experimentation
Abstract
In parallel to its discussions about the future of centralized Internet resources,
NETmundial participants should support continued experimentation with peer-to-peer
technologies that could potentially decentralize some of those resources in the future.
Document
Much of the debate over Internet governance is a consequence of the fact that some
resources, especially the Domain Name System (DNS), are centralized and hierarchical.
These resources raise questions of fairness, accountability, and power that are not easily
resolved. This contribution does not directly address these difficult questions.
Rather, this contribution urges NETmundial participants to support continued
experimentation in the decentralization of critical Internet resources through peer-to-peer
systems. Such systems have the potential to improve name resolution security, provide
censorship-resistance, and protect end-user privacy online. In addition, as peer-to-peer
technologies mature, they raise the possibility of cutting the Gordian knot with respect to
questions of control raised by centralized resources.
Existing peer-to-peer decentralized name systems use pseudo Top-Level Domains
(TLDs) (such as .onion, .bit, and .gnu) that do not yet exist in the DNS in order to avoid
any unintended conflicts. Over 100,000 domain names are already in use in the .bit space
alone. An Internet-Draft RFC by Grothoff et al. entitled “Special-Use Domain Names of
Peer-to-Peer Systems” proposes to normalize the use of some pseudo-TLDs by reserving
them for special use in the DNS per the procedure defined in RFC 6761.
While the Internet community must ultimately face the thorny questions relating to
centralized Internet resources, we should also, on a parallel track, support continued
experimentation in the decentralization of those resources through peer-to-peer
technologies. One way to do this would be to express support, in principle, for the
normalization of some peer-to-peer pseudo-TLDs as envisioned in the Grothoff Internet-
Draft.