"Toward a Single, Global Digital Economy: The First Report
of the Aspen Institute IDEA Project"
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Charles Firestone
Region: The Aspen Institute
Organization: Executive Director, Communications and Society Program
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords:
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
The Aspen InstituteOne Dupont Circle, NW Suite 700Washington, DC 20036USA1-202-
736-5818
Document
The Aspen Institute IDEA Project is an internationally inclusive forum that engages
corporations, civil society and government officials to identify ways to foster the freedom
to connect; preserve open, end-to-end networks; and reassess the international regime
that facilitates the free flow of communications across borders on a unified Internet.
The Aspen Institute IDEA Project is led by Reed Hundt, former Chairman of the U.S.
Federal Communications Commission. Dr. Peter Cowhey, Dean of the University of
California, San Diego School of International Relations and Pacific Studies, spearheads
the efforts to develop policies that will update the international regime for Internet
communications, and Charlie Firestone, Executive Director of the Aspen Institute
Communications and Society Program, is overseeing the project on behalf of the Aspen
Institute.
The Aspen Institute IDEA Project conducts its work through a series of forums with select
groups of leaders from foreign countries, competing industries and the non-profit sector.
The project had financial support from a consortium of charitable foundations, including
the Markle Foundation, John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, Ford Foundation and
MacArthur Foundation.
Under the managing directorship of Gary Epstein, Toward a Single, Global Digital
Economy: The First Report of the Aspen Institute IDEA Project was released April 24,
2012. The report discusses critical steps forward for establishing a fair, effective, and
empowering multi-stakeholder system for governing the flow and use of data in a single
global digital economy. The accompanying text includes a common statement as well as
a series of principles developed by forum participants.