Toward a Single Global Digital Economy:
The First Report of the Aspen Institute IDEA Project
Introduction
The Internet is the most robust medium of information exchange in history.
Two billion people are now connected, and at current growth rates everyone with
Internet access will join the Internet community within a decade. Barring technological
and political disruptions, the world’s populace will then be on a single
common digital platform. The global medium can provide unparalleled personal
well-being, economic growth and beneficial social change.
The risk of technological and political disruption now looms very large. The
power of the medium to promote change has produced a counter-revolutionary
response among many political and business interests. In numerous countries,
leaders have called for government to interrupt the free flow of data (the essence
of the Internet) at state borders and to create within political boundaries unique
national regimes for regulating the Internet. Regulation in many instances means
the specific curtailment of the capability to exercise the full potential for change
provided by the Internet. In some cases, business and government leaders have
called for bilateral or multilateral government regulation, sponsored, for example,
by the United Nations. These calls raise grave risks to the robust expansion of the
Internet that do not seem outweighed by any benefits that might be created for the
Internet community.
To consider now, in what still are the early years of the global spread of the
Internet, the appropriate forms of governance of this medium, the Aspen Institute,
supported by major foundations, and working with a broad array of stakeholders,
conducted the two-year project called the International Digital Economy Accords—
the Aspen Institute IDEA Project. This is the report emanating from IDEA.
Summary of Opportunity and Risks
The Aspen IDEA Project began by considering the advantages of a single common
medium. Technological advances in computing and mobility and in software
and data-driven services can foster the growth of the Internet to everyone
everywhere. As it grows in scale and scope, the Internet advances creativity and
learning, accelerates innovation in new and existing businesses, and enhances the
3
4 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
creation and delivery of public goods, including better government. The Internet
can empower citizens of any state or every state to work together to grow their
economies and solve their social problems. Its building block is the individual
user, but its value is in the network effects of a common global medium.
The Internet’s building block is the individual user, but its
value is in the network effects of a common global medium.
As a global network, the Internet gives the farmer in Africa instant access to
weather conditions, crop prices and health information. It allows migrant workers
in the United Arab Emirates to connect with family and friends left behind in India.
It enables children in rural Brazil to take virtual tours of museums in Europe or to
engage in massive multiplayer games with peers in Asia and around the world. It
offers small businesses in Indonesia, Ireland or Ethiopia cheap and flexible fulfillment
possibilities as they access global markets. It serves the aspirations of individuals
everywhere, whether they are advancing their personal well-being, their local
communities, their standards of living or their aims for self-governance.
In addition, the Internet has a magic quality that reinforces its own potential:
namely, the Internet thrives because no single government or private firm, or even
group of governments or firms, controls it. It is run by the many for the benefit
of all.
It is in everyone’s interest, then, to have a trusted, robust and reliable Internet,
where access is easy and where the rights of privacy, property and security are
respected. But the advantages of a global common medium evaporate if the
Internet fragments into regional or local networks. If countries wall themselves off
from the global medium, or unduly restrict users’ access to content, or if jurisdictional
niceties block the transfer of information across borders, the public suffers
in the following ways:
• Undue barriers to trade and increased protectionism lead to the loss of
the benefits of competition: lower prices, choice of services and increased
innovation.
• Deviations from a rule-of-law approach lead to a lack of trust as it relates
to privacy, security and intellectual property protection.
• Lack of harmonization can lead to differences in deployment of broadband
infrastructure, impede spectrum management and hamper interoperability.
• Jurisdictional and regulatory differences can lead to differences in the
adoption of human rights, particularly with respect to the freedoms of
communication.
The Report 5
Yet, as with free trade or free speech, the Internet is such a powerful medium
for change that some governments and firms want to control it in order to limit
its impact. Indeed, even if no one can know the ultimate outcome of the recent
challenge to the long-standing government of Egypt, when that government shut
down its people’s access to the global Internet, the world learned a new lesson
about the importance of connectivity.
The advantages of a global common medium evaporate if
the Internet fragments into regional or local networks.
We are now at an important crossroads in how the Internet will evolve as a
global common medium. Will it remain open, free to unleash tremendous innovation
and to be the engine of economic growth? Or it will become fragmented,
where the free flow of information and services will be hampered and locked down
into separate zones of control?
Today there is a window of opportunity to develop a baseline of principles,
policies and practices that can promote the Internet as a global medium and prevent
fragmentation. That is why the Aspen Institute Communications and Society
Program convened the IDEA Project.
How IDEA Was Conducted
The goal of the Aspen Institute International Digital Economy Accords (IDEA)
Project was to establish a fair, effective and empowering system for governing
the flow and use of data in a single global digital economy. The Project engaged
businesses and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in the design of enduring
principles and of a governance system that implemented those principles. At the
center of IDEA’s mission was the establishment of the Internet as the common
medium through which all of the world’s people could securely, fairly, openly and
freely exercise their economic and human rights. It became clear, as well, that a
multistakeholder approach to governance would be best.
To persuade all to adopt a multistakeholder process based on durable principles,
IDEA took on two tasks: (1) to develop a consensus view about the beliefs
and values of the Internet and (2) to construct a means of implementing that view.
The test of success would be whether the ideas of IDEA could resolve real cases
of deviation from generally accepted principles and problematic cases of enforcement
of said principles. There were many dramatic examples of hard cases in these
last two years.
6 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
The goal of the IDEA Project was to establish a fair,
effective and empowering system for governing the flow
and use of data in a single global digital economy.
The Project proceeded by means of four plenary sessions, multiple working
groups and a series of working papers and documents. At least 36 American and
European companies, 14 representatives of civil society, and 4 foundations were
represented. All devoted much time and intellectual capital to the effort. Highlevel
government officials from 6 countries representing 18 different agencies
provided valuable input and insights. This two-year process has led to this report,
which (1) publishes the Aspen IDEA Principles and (2) advances some thoughts
about a multistakeholder, trade-based implementation system.
As to broad principles, the Aspen IDEA Project produced a clear statement of the
ideal Internet culture. The Principles resulted from an extensive process, although
they were not endorsed by each of the participants, and cannot, in whole or in part,
be attributed to any specific participant or group of participants in the Project.
Nevertheless, the Principles were aimed at delivering common views among commercial,
civil society and individual users on the most significant and difficult issues
facing Internet governance. These Principles are as follows: the free flow of communications;
free trade of digital goods, services and ideas; creation of a trusted
environment for use of the Internet (including two sides of a coin of rights—piracy
and privacy); and transparency in a multistakeholder process. The Aspen IDEA
Principles may have influenced and at least supplemented principles developed at
other forums, including the government-sponsored work at the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), in what a White House official
participating on the Project called “The Year of Principles–2011.”
With respect to any set of principles, the test for their efficacy is: Do they speak
to problems that most agree need solving? As discussed below, the Aspen IDEA
Principles pass this test.
As to the implementation of the Principles, the Project aimed to define a multistakeholder
process, or trade agreement, that emphasized market access for broadband
at the hardware, software and content levels. No adequate mechanism now
exists to carry the culture of the Internet—the fabric of beliefs and values shared by
more than two billion people—to all the expanding frontiers of the Internet. The
Project’s goal was to define a mechanism that did not require government enforcement
of the Aspen IDEA Principles, but did encourage respect for the Principles
by every nation and all the interest groups in every nation. The result sought was
to generate a digital economy that demonstrated respect for rights of property,
The Report 7
privacy, security and that acknowledged all human rights. The essence of such an
implementation mechanism is the idea of multistakeholder governance for the
Internet. These enforcement mechanisms were designed to carry that notion into
governance of a single global digital economy.
The Project also hoped to outline a trade-based solution that was to be
based in large part on the success of the World Trade Organization’s Basic
Telecommunications Agreement (BTA), which is annexed to the General
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). The negotiations of the GATS were
started by the WTO in Marrakesh in 1993. The basic principles in the BTA were
defined by U.S. Vice President Al Gore in a major speech to the International
Telecommunications Union (ITU) Development Conference in Buenos Aires in
early 1994. Drawing on that precedent, the Project proposed to link a multilateral
trade agreement to the Aspen IDEA Principles, as stated in a reference paper.
At the fourth Aspen IDEA Plenary Session in November 2011, IDEA staff
offered a “thought experiment” aimed at generating ideas about implementation.
In the ensuing discussions and deliberations, there was strong agreement on the
need for a multistakeholder governance process. There was also spirited discussion
on whether there was a need for any “connective tissue,” i.e., a way to coordinate,
in any respect, the collection of existing and future multistakeholder entities. A
consensus on coordination did not develop by the time that the IDEA Project
reached its end. Several aspects of the “thought experiment” appear below, and
other forums in the coming years will need to pursue the quest for means to implement
principles into practice.
The Aspen IDEA Project Participants and Process
The Plenary Sessions and Working Groups benefited enormously from the participation
of a broad range of corporate, civil society, foundation and government
representatives. The government representatives did not join the Working Groups;
but they gave generously of their time and expertise in the Plenary Sessions, and
Project staff consulted with them throughout the process.
The Project was funded by, and owes particular gratitude to the following foundations:
the Markle Foundation, John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, Ford
Foundation and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. In particular,
Stefaan Verhulst of the Markle Foundation deserves special thanks for his
support, insights and day-to-day participation in the process. However, financial
support of the Project does not imply the funders’ agreement with any particular
statement made in this report.
American and European companies from every digital industry segment
were instrumental in the development of the Aspen IDEA Common Statement
8 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
and Principles, and they provided valuable insight into implementation issues.
Similarly, civil society participants from the U.S., Europe, South America and Asia
were vital to the process. The Project benefitted greatly from the input and advice
of key government officials and agencies from six countries, plus representatives
from the European Parliament and the European Commission. More specifically,
in addition to the EU representatives, officials from the following countries
and agencies contributed to the effort: Canada—Canadian Radio-Television
and Telecommunications Commission; Denmark—National IT and Telecom
Agency, Danish Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation; France—Conseil
Stratégique des Technologies de l’Information and Office of the President of
France; Netherlands—Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Sweden—Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; United States—Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce
(NTIA), Department of State, Federal Communications Commission, Executive
Office of the President, including National Economic Council and the Office of
Science and Technology Policy, Office of the United States Trade Representative,
and the President’s Intelligence Advisory Board.
The Project built on the prior work of Jonathan Aronson of the University of
Southern California; Peter Cowhey of the University of California, San Diego;
and Donald Abelson, who in 2009–2010 convened a group of firms to discuss
global Internet issues outlined in their book Transforming Global Information and
Communication Markets: The Political Economy of Innovation (MIT Press, 2009).
They joined with Aspen IDEA Chairman Reed Hundt, Managing Director and
General Counsel Gary Epstein, Charlie Firestone, Shanthi Kalathil, Melanie Hart,
Sarah Eppehimer, David Hansen and Kate Aishton to guide the process.
A representative list of the Aspen IDEA Project participants that attended one
or more of the four Plenary Sessions is included in the appendix to this report.
In addition to those listed, the Project also benefited from the work of additional
representatives from the companies and civil society in the working groups.
However, participation in the Project at any one point does not necessarily reflect
agreement by a participant or their employer of any particular statement in this
report. Rather the report reflects the Project staff’s sense of the group.
Portions of the Project’s work product are included in the appendix to this
report:
• The Aspen Institute IDEA Project Framework Paper
• Internet Freedom: A Background Paper, Shanthi Kalathil
• Privacy Standards in the Digital Economy: Enhancing Trust and Legal
Certainty in Transatlantic Relations, Remarks by Viviane Reding
• The Role of Public Authorities in Cloud Computing, Remarks by Neelie
Kroes
The Report 9
• The Cloud: Unleashing Global Opportunities, Remarks by Julius
Genachowski
• Remarks Given at the Aspen IDEA Plenary, Washington, D.C., Reed Hundt
• Cross-Border Information Flows and Digital Trade Principles
• Plenary Participants
The deliberations over principles began at the initial meeting in Washington,
D.C. in October 2010. The discussion was aided by reference to the Framework
Paper included in the appendix. The Framework Paper analyzed fundamental
changes in today’s global markets affecting the Internet and related international
communications systems. It then explored choices for collective action to achieve
the Project’s goals, stressing the critical need for cooperative leadership in the face
of proliferating threats to the culture of the Internet.
The participants discussed and formulated topics for further deliberations.
There was a strong emphasis and focus on market opportunities. Most recognized
that Internet freedom is an inextricable part of the debate. Market freedom and
personal freedom were generally recognized as complementary values, although
subject to careful definition.
After the initial meeting, IDEA formed five working groups: (1) Promoting
Innovation and Access—Market Opportunities; (2) Publishing in an Open
Internet; (3) Network, Device, Application and Service Interconnection; (4)
Cloud, Data Control and Sovereignty; and (5) Values and Methods of Information
and Communications Technology (ICT) Innovation. Corporate and NGO representatives
chaired the working groups and moderated the calls, which were
also facilitated by IDEA staff. The discussions were spirited and productive. After
several months of weekly calls and meetings, each group produced a report. These
reports were compiled into a single working document for the January 2011 Los
Angeles Plenary Session.
At the Los Angeles Plenary Session, each Working Group Chair presented a
draft set of principles, set forth its underlying rationale and led a group discussion
on the issues. Each of the working groups focused on ways to promote the single
global digital market within the context of their specific working group charter.
In order to narrow discussion toward the goal of specificity, the Los Angeles participants
recommended that the principles be tested, discussed and analyzed in the
context of “cloud computing.” Ambassador William Kennard, U.S. Ambassador
to the European Union, stressed the importance of bringing European companies,
civil society and European Union (EU) government representatives into the
Project.
10 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Building upon the Los Angeles efforts, and on Ambassador Kennard’s recommendation,
IDEA staff and participants recruited additional European representatives.
With expanded attendance, the third Plenary Session was held in Brussels
in late March 2011. At that meeting, the IDEA staff presented a revised version
of the principles in a Discussion Paper. The Paper used cloud computing as a
test case. As part of the Project’s incorporation of more European perspectives,
European Commission Vice Presidents Neelie Kroes and Viviane Reding and
Deputy Director General for Information Society and Media Antti Peltomäki set
forth a European approach to the Project’s issues. Representatives from Brazil and
India civil society also participated in the Brussels plenary session. Afterwards, the
original five working groups, expanded by new European participants, re-formed
into a trio of new working groups focusing on (1) market access, (2) free flow of
information and (3) trusted environment issues. In addition, each of the three
new Working Groups was asked to help formulate portions of an Aspen IDEA
Common Statement. The Common Statement was intended to be a general
articulation of the three working groups’ more specific delineation of principles.
The working groups continued after the March 2011 Brussels Plenary Session.
This was an especially eventful time. Many of the Project’s participants were
involved in the E-G8 meeting in Paris in May 2011. Many were also part of an
OECD High-Level Meeting in Paris in June 2011. The former revolved in general
terms around the core issues debated in the IDEA Project. The latter led to the
promulgation of principles, discussed in detail below, that could be described as
“in dialogue” with the Aspen IDEA Principles.1
Taking these events into account, Aspen IDEA set the fourth and concluding
Plenary Session in Washington, D.C. for November 2011. There, the staff presented
the Aspen IDEA Common Statement and Principles. As a result of dialogue
at the Plenary Session, the Principles were amended and are published below. The
Washington Plenary Session also generally debated and discussed Internet governance
issues and specifically discussed a means to implement the Aspen IDEA or
other principles.
The Internet freedom agenda was at all times an inextricable part of the Aspen
IDEA process. In the first Washington, D.C. Plenary Session, the staff presented a
paper on Internet freedom (see Appendix).
As the Project continued, it was thrilling and instructive to watch the 2011 Arab
Spring unfold in large part on the common medium of the Internet. Even though
the denouement of the Arab uprisings lies in the future, already these events have
1. Communique on Principles for Internet Policy-Making,” OECD High Level Meeting, Paris, France, June
28-29, 2011, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/33/12/48387430.pdf.
The Report 11
echoed in Russia and other countries. A central argument of the Aspen IDEA
Principles is that governments should support and extend Internet culture, not
curtail it.
In 2010 and 2011, United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton delivered a
series of three speeches on Internet freedom. In them, she outlined both the benefits
of an open and secure Internet, and the consequences of failing to live up to
those ideas. One of the purposes of the Project was to strengthen and apply those
ideas. In her trilogy, Secretary Clinton made it a tenet of American policy that the
United States, in concert with other governments, will promote the Internet as a
single global platform. State Department representatives Alec Ross and Ben Scott
forcefully presented Secretary Clinton’s policies in all of our meetings.
A central argument of the Aspen IDEA Principles is that
governments should support and extend Internet culture,
not curtail it.
In January 2010, Secretary Clinton began the presentation of her views by stating
that, “The spread of information networks is forming a new nervous system for
our planet.” But she stated these technologies can be used “to undermine human
progress and political rights.” She described “a spike in threats to the free flow of
information.” Then Secretary Clinton said that the United States stands for “a single
Internet where all of humanity has access to knowledge and ideas.” She likened
this position to the First Amendment and to Franklin Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms
speech in 1941. She then expounded on the Internet’s capability to provide “access
to knowledge and potential markets” and thus to “create opportunities where
none exist.” She said, “Disruptions in these demand a coordinated response by all
governments, the private sector and the international community.” She called for
a global “freedom to connect.”2
Secretary Clinton’s second speech, on February 15, 2011, responded directly to
events in the Arab Spring.3 She described the Internet as “the public space of the
2. Hillary Clinton, “Remarks on Internet Freedom,” (Speech, Newseum, Washington, D.C., January 10, 2010),
http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2010/01/135519.htm.
3. Hillary Clinton, “Rights and Wrongs: Choices & Challenges in a Networked World,” (Speech, George
Washington University, Washington, D.C., February 15, 2011), http://www.state.gov/secretary/
rm/2011/02/156619.htm.
12 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
21st century.” She restated the importance of the “freedom to connect,” and she
listed more threats to the exercise of that freedom. She then asserted that “liberty
and security … make each other possible,” and so both are necessary to the functioning
of the Internet. She also called for both “transparency and confidentiality”
in the Internet culture. Finally, she called for both “tolerance and civility.” Her
dualisms captured the balances the Aspen IDEA Principles tried to strike.
Her third and last speech in the series, on December 8, 2011, was a forceful
summary.4 She clearly explained network effects: “When ideas are blocked, information
deleted, conversations stifled and people constrained in their choices, the
Internet is diminished for all of us.” She called (as does the IDEA’s implementation
proposal) for “cooperative action…shared principles…[and ways] to navigate
the practical challenges of marinating an Internet that is open and free while
also inter-operable, secure and reliable.” Secretary Clinton said private companies
and users have to be part of governance, while governments should not “replace
the current multistakeholder approach, which includes governments, the private
sector and citizens, and supports the free flow of information, in a single global
network.” She decried “national barriers in cyberspace” and called for a “truly
global coalition to preserve an open Internet.”
Secretary Clinton’s three speeches animated the IDEA effort in at least three
ways. As she did, the Project recognizes real threats to an open Internet, including
acts by states and nongovernmental agents. The Project enumerates principles that
should be shared by all those who connect to the Internet—a new, modern, basic,
global freedom. And the Project’s participants began to outline practical mechanisms
to use multistakeholder governance, instead of state control, as the method
to assure for everyone the manifold benefits of this single global medium.
4. Hillary Clinton, “Conference on Internet Freedom,” (Speech, Fokker Terminal, The Hague, Netherlands,
December 8, 2011), http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2011/12/178511.htm.
The Report 13
The Aspen IDEA Common Statement and Principles
The Aspen IDEA Common Statement was formulated and refined between
the Brussels Plenary Session in March of 2011 and the second Washington, D.C.
Plenary Session in November 2011. It is a prologue to the more specific principles
for the IDEA Project. In our view, the Common Statement should be adopted by
all participants in the global Internet, and it is very much in accord with the prevailing
culture of the Internet. The Common Statement and Principles collectively
constitute “The Aspen IDEA Principles.”
The Aspen IDEA Common Statement
All elements of a digital economy and society should be bought, sold,
created or experienced in a single seamless global market of goods,
services and ideas over broadband infrastructures that operate in a
dynamic commercial environment.
All information should be transferred across any and all national
borders as senders and receivers should wish. Any restrictions resulting
from measures taken by governments to safeguard public policy principles
should be proportional, transparent, equitable, necessary, provided
for by law and consistent with international treaties or best practices
on privacy, security, protection of intellectual property rights and free
expression. Commercial agreements and voluntary arrangements may
go beyond measures taken by governments but should be compliant
with applicable law, relevant international treaties and best practices.
The seamless, global transfer of information and exchange of digital
goods and services should occur in a responsible and accountable
trusted environment that guarantees the interests of national and personal
security, the right of individuals to privacy, and the interests that
individuals and firms have in rights of property and rights of access to
information, association and free expression.
14 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
The Aspen IDEA Principles
The Aspen IDEA Principles fall into three clusters: those that strengthen
the Internet infrastructure and promote free trade in the Internet’s ecosystem,
those that enhance the international free flow of information and those that
promote a trusted environment for the Internet:
A. Strengthen the Internet Infrastructure and Promote Free Trade in the ICT
Ecosystem
1. Governments should foster a pro-competitive policy environment
and promote investment, including cross-border investment, in the
facilities and services supporting the Internet infrastructure and
expansion of the Internet as rapidly as possible.
2. Governments should expand the Internet by encouraging competition
in broadband access and other relevant markets. In light of
the growing importance of broadband mobile networking, governments
should commit to embrace the following policies:
a. Maximize the availability of spectrum through continual
improvements in spectrum policy.
b. Assure technology neutrality in the design of the wireless
network and its devices.
c. Subject to competition policies, permit commercially
determined approaches to the intersection of the wired
and wireless segments of the Internet space.
3. To permit suppliers of communications infrastructure to participate
fully in the ICT ecosystem and, thus, fuel investment in that
infrastructure, governments should commit to these actions:
a. Redefine the relevant market for networked consumer
information to provide nondiscriminatory treatment of
telecom carriers, particularly in regard to privacy requirements
for how they handle customers’ electronic data.
b. Continue to rely on flexible market-based frameworks for
network pricing, traffic policies and interconnection in
order to maintain an open and interconnected Internet
ecosystem, subject to the reasonable oversight of competition
authorities.
The Report 15
4. Governments should expand the capability of the Internet to
increase trade and adopt policy measures designed to maximize free
trade in all aspects of the ICT ecosystem.
5. To encourage trade and innovation in services and software, governments
should:
a. Allow IP-based and converged services (e.g., cloud computing
and environmental services) to enjoy maximum
regulatory flexibility and to be subject to regulatory obligations
only to the extent that they are narrowly tailored to
the dynamics of this rapidly evolving sector.
b. Reinforce policies that support technology neutrality,
including promoting digital product neutrality for applications
and software.
6. As the range of ICT applications expand in the economy and society,
and the salience of these applications to important rights and
needs of citizens increases, new policy interventions are needed in
ICT markets. Governments should make best efforts to advance
“regulatory coherence” among national policies with major impact
on ICT markets, including by creating internal government mechanisms
to promote coherence. To do so governments should publish
annually a list of planned future measures that impact ICT goods
and services.
B. Free Flow of Information Principles
1. Governments should allow the free flow of information globally.
a. Allowing information to move freely and be stored globally
permits the capture of economies of scale and makes it
possible to reap the economic benefits associated with the
Internet.
2. Governments should not artificially or geographically restrict facilities
and information storage.
a. Artificially limiting the location of data geographically
reduces the resiliency of the Internet and undermines its
stability.
b. Governments should not require that facilities or information
be located in a specific country or region.
16 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
3. Other Protections.
a. Freedom of expression, as defined in international treaties
on human rights, should be preserved.
b. Any government restrictions on content should be transparent,
necessary, provided for by law and consistent with
international standards on free expression and privacy.
c. Governments should provide to information on the Internet
the same protection from government access as information
stored locally or housed in any other environment.
d. To encourage the online dissemination of services and
content, governments should offer providers appropriate
intermediary safe harbors to shield them when hosted
content or software is alleged to violate a law or infringe on
third party rights, including intellectual property rights.
C. Creating a Trusted Environment
1. Global Internet policy and practice must promote a functioning
“trusted environment” with respect to issues such as security; privacy;
intellectual property rights; protection of children, consumers
and personal data online; and free expression. All stakeholders
should recognize government, civil society and private sector needs
for security of the Internet.
a. Governments should implement clear, transparent and
impartial laws, including due process protections and reasonable
notice, to govern requests for third party information
stored by Internet providers.
b. Governments should develop fast, efficient methods for
gathering and sharing information regarding fraudulent
and deceptive commercial practices that can victimize
consumers through the Internet, and the means to deter,
detect and prevent such practices.
c. Governments should develop policy requirements that
make certain that consumers’ personal data is portable.
Such policies should provide consumers with reasonable
access to their own data gathered by suppliers about
that user’s conduct on the Internet (e.g., records of
past purchases) and personal information submitted to
The Report 17
Internet-based applications (e.g., personal health information
stored on a web-based application for personal health
monitoring).
d. Governments have an obligation to assure that the private
sector maintains enhanced consumer protection:
i. Internet providers should transparently explain their
information handling practices and the regulatory
needs of their server locations with respect to such
issues as data protection and privacy.
ii. Internet providers should disclose requested third-party
information only to the extent required by law and,
to the extent permitted by law, should provide affected
customers with reasonable advance notice of any such
compelled disclosure.
iii. Governments should work to create a level playing
field and achieve global interoperability on privacy
and data protection principles by basing privacy rules
on globally recognized principles (such as the OECD
privacy guidelines) and by extending mutual recognition
of laws that achieve the same objectives. Privacy
rules should also consider fundamental rights such as
freedom of speech, freedom of the press and an open
and transparent government.
e. Governments should enforce intellectual property rules as
they relate to the Internet and the ICT ecosystem.
f. Governments should ensure clearly defined legal rights
and a robust and fair process to protect rights, including
users’ rights, consistent with the need of governments to
enforce applicable law. Governments, industry and civil
society should work together to foster respect for the rule
of law, defined here as a system of transparent, predictable
and accessible laws and independent legal institutions and
processes that respect, protect, promote and fulfill human
rights.
g. Governments should implement internationally recognized,
market-driven security standards and best practices
to promote cybersecurity, while simultaneously ensuring
that the framework conditions ensuring an open Internet
are not disrupted.
18 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Discussion and Analysis of the IDEA Principles
Rights and Obligations
The Aspen IDEA Principles (the Common Statement plus the specific Principles)
are a combination of positive and negative liberties, or rights. They assert powers
to use the Internet that are inherent for all people. These include the capability to
send and receive information anywhere in the world, across all national boundaries
and to all individuals, subject only to commonly understood prohibitions
against criminal activity. Internet users also should have the capability to form
associations, participate in networks and express themselves freely. Similarly, the
Principles envision as positive liberties the use of the Internet for entrepreneurial
activity, the process of creating and capturing value in commercial activities on the
single global digital economy and the capability to market and sell on the common
medium.
By describing the Aspen IDEA Principles as positive liberties, the project
intended to state that firms and individuals in every country should be able to
share in the economies of scale and network effects. These multiply exponentially
(Metcalfe’s Law) as the Internet increases in the number of participants, both animate
and inanimate.
Some contend that Internet access and web participation are not fundamental
rights. The Aspen IDEA Principles presuppose that, as McLuhan wrote decades
ago, “the medium is the message”—or, in other terms, in the digital age, no one
can exercise to the fullest such rights as free expression and innovation without
being able to be part of the Internet community. Economic, political and technological
barriers to that participation are not to be tolerated.
The Principles also include negative liberties: statements of what individuals,
firms and nation states should not do. If its governance limits these negative acts,
the Internet can evolve in an expanding open space of creative action and technological
innovation. Advances in microprocessor price and performance, fiber and
radio wave connectivity, and data storage and retrieval have already permitted the
Internet to host and to distribute goods and services in degrees of scale and scope
that were unforeseen even a few years ago. Unplanned and unpredicted innovation
abounds in the common medium, although governments, acting alone and
in concert, may assist in assuring various positive liberties. According to the IDEA
Principles, these enumerated negative liberties should prohibit governments from
accidentally or intentionally creating harmful barriers to the open innovative evolution
of the Internet.
The Report 19
Categories of IDEA Principles
The Aspen IDEA Principles fall into three broad categories, mirroring the
working groups: market access, free flow of information and trusted environment.
These categories are mutually supporting. Each is indispensable to ensuring
Internet freedom and function.
The Market Access category focuses on connectivity, guiding the creation and
maintenance of the physical networks on which information flows. The Principles
in this category allow market forces to guide the expansion of these networks and
for these networks then to open markets as a whole. This market focus means
adopting technologically neutral policies. Consumers should determine what
goods and services win the day.
The Principles include a bar against governments discriminating among telecom
carriers in imposing privacy requirements. Governments also should not impose
any restrictions on IP-based and converged services such as cloud computing. In
general, governments need only preserve the status quo of flexible, market-based
frameworks, as in the case of network pricing, traffic policies and interconnection,
including the choice of access and application technologies and service providers’
treatment of traffic. Many participants at the November 2011 Plenary Session in
Washington vigorously stated this point. Because of the growth of broadband
mobile networking, governments should maximize available spectrum through
both licensed and unlicensed modes of use. Commercial markets, not regulators,
should determine what devices and network solutions will exploit that spectrum.
As technologies change, the Aspen IDEA Principles will need to change in application.
However, the Principles are sufficiently robust that they should provide a
precedent-based system of governance. Moreover, the Principles should promote
cross-border investment in Internet infrastructure. They should also encourage
fair trade policies that maximize the social and economic benefits produced by
technological innovation.
The Free Flow of Information category contains the Principles that capture the
role of information (or data) as a positive force for both commerce and human
rights. This category’s Principles address two main issues: the geographical storage
of data and the protection of free expression and privacy. Regarding data location,
policymakers must ensure that national sovereignty and regional agreements do not
create barriers that threaten the security and resiliency of transnational networks.
… policymakers must ensure that national sovereignty and
regional agreements do not create barriers that threaten
the security and resiliency of transnational networks.
20 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
As stated in the Principles, governments should remove rules that limit the
geographical location of data storage facilities. They should void regulations that
undermine the stability and resiliency of the Internet. Subjecting data stored in foreign
facilities to different regulations from those imposed on locally stored data produces
similar effects to outright bans. The Aspen IDEA Principles reject such rules.
To protect privacy and free expression, governments should offer information
exchanged online the same protections as information in any other environment.
If governments wish to impose restrictions on information to protect against
criminal behavior, or to serve some other social purpose, any such regulation
should be transparent, part of the overall rule of law and consistent with international
norms.
To encourage the exchange of services and content online, service providers who
facilitate those exchanges should not be burdened with the obligation to interfere
with those exchanges. Further, they should not face liability for providing a common
medium, any more than manufacturers of printing presses or a newsprint
seller should be responsible for what someone publishes on paper. Reasonable
intermediary safe harbors are necessary to shield providers against allegations
that they are hosting illegal content. Governments can create an environment in
which information flows freely, without asking service providers to be censorious.
Businesses can best exploit economies of scale and reap the economic benefits of
the Internet if service providers are not asked, in effect, to act as agents of government.
This approach, however, is not intended to condone, rationalize or protect
those who do violate the rule of law consistent with international norms.
All participants in the Internet ecosystem, including service providers, recognize
the importance of content. The attendant rights of content owners are discussed
below in the Trusted Environment category. Discussions of the appropriate balance
between trusted environment and free flow of information concerns were an
important aspect of the Aspen IDEA dialogue. However, the participants were not
able to reconcile intellectual property and intermediary safe harbor issues, and the
discussion will need to continue in other forums.
The Trusted Environment category contains the Principles that focus on the
vital government and private interests needed to protect the Internet from misuse,
while preserving vital rights of free expression. Tackling a broad range of issues
that has attracted increasing attention in recent years, this category’s provisions
are grouped into those aimed primarily at protecting privacy and those aimed at
preventing the creation online of activities commonly regarded as criminal.
Protecting privacy online requires both protecting the rights of consumers and
controlling the actions of service providers. Consumers should have access to and
control of the personal data they submit or that service providers collect regarding
their actions online. To achieve this end, service providers must be transparent
The Report 21
about their practices regarding consumer data, limit their disclosure of personal
data to third parties to those required by law and inform consumers of necessary
disclosures whenever possible.
Rules governing third-party requests for information, like all rules in the desired
Internet governance system, should be clear, transparent and impartial. They must
be administered with due process and reasonable notice provisions.
Coordinating policies across national boundaries will further protect consumers
and enhance efficiency. Therefore, governments should build their rules
around internationally accepted privacy principles, such as those established by
the OECD.5 They should extend mutual recognition of laws that differ in form
but achieve these same goals.
Without safety from fraud, abuse and theft, commerce and civil society cannot
continue to thrive on the Internet. To keep users safe, governments should implement
internationally recognized, market-driven cybersecurity standards. They
should attend to best practices and enforce existing intellectual property rules.
Developing fast, efficient methods for gathering and sharing information when
violations occur will also help governments respond to existing problems and
deter others in the future. These actions should all be taken with due consideration
of user rights and acknowledgment of the right of free expression. Government,
industry and civil society should cooperate to assure that all parties respect the rule
of law and freedom of information.
The IDEA Principles aim to create a sustainable,
vibrant digital environment for…social and economic
development.
These three categories form a coherent set of fundamental guidelines for
enhancing the Internet’s capacity to create economic growth and improve quality
of life. Without resilient and accessible infrastructure, information has no path to
individuals and businesses. Without freely accessible information, infrastructure
lacks value to those users. Without trust that these networks are safe for lawful
expression and commerce, users’ generation and use of information will diminish.
The world then would be culturally, economically and politically poorer. The
IDEA Principles aim to create a sustainable, vibrant digital environment for the
magnification of the possibility of social and economic development.
5. OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data, adopted September
23, 1980, http://www.oecd.org/document/18/0,3343,en_2649_34255_1815186_1_1_1_1,00.html.
22 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Comparison to Other Internet Principles
The Aspen IDEA Project’s efforts to develop fundamentals of good international
Internet governance were complementary to other initiatives in 2011. A
compilation and comparison of several such efforts is included in the appendix of
this report.6
Some, such as the White House’s Cybersecurity Proposal,7 focused on important
but comparatively narrow policy areas. Perhaps the process most closely resembling
the Aspen IDEA Project was the government-sponsored OECD process. The OECD
Principles were carefully negotiated in a multistakeholder process and unveiled in a
laudably open, high-level meeting in Paris.8 Civil society representatives balked at
endorsing the OECD Principles, but many companies were supportive. Expressed
in a cautious tone, the OECD Principles reflected an inter-governmental perspective,
but one that emphasized a light touch with regard to regulation.
The Aspen IDEA Principles reflect somewhat greater focus on transparency in
nation state regulation of the digital economy. They have a somewhat more prescriptive
tone. They focus more than the OECD on cross-border data flows and
on trade issues.
The OECD Principles looked to future multistakeholder efforts for defining the
limits of intermediary liability. The IDEA Principles instead call now for governments
to create appropriate intermediary safe harbors to shield service providers
from liability for innocently transmitting content that infringes on a third party’s
rights.
A system to improve government response to online fraud and deception is
present in the IDEA plan but absent from the OECD Principles, as are recommendations
for empowering consumers to gain access to and control the information
collected about them online. The OECD Principles also make no mention
of placing privacy protection requirements on service providers, while the IDEA
Principles call for Internet service providers (ISPs) to disclose their privacy practices
to consumers and to limit the disclosure of consumer information to third
parties to the greatest extent possible.
In general, the IDEA Principles explicitly enumerate that which governments
should not do. Governments should not require that facilities or information be
6. See “Cross-Border Information Flows and Digital Trade Principles,” in the appendix for additional efforts
aimed at developing fundamentals of international Internet governance that are not discussed in this section,
including the U.S.-EU Trade Principles for ICT Services and the G8 Deauville Declaration.
7. “Fact Sheet, Cybersecurity Legislative Proposal,” The White House, May 12, 2011, http://www.whitehouse.
gov/sites/default/files/fact_sheet-administration_cybersecurity_legislative_proposal.pdf.
8. “Communique on Principles for Internet Policy-Making,” OECD High Level Meeting, Paris, France, June
28-29, 2011, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/33/12/48387430.pdf.
The Report 23
located in a specific country or region. End users should be able to access data
across borders. Data centers are efficiently located where power is relatively cheap,
weather conditions permit natural cooling and fiber access to the global networks
is ample and inexpensive. These efficiencies cannot be achieved in many nation
states. But the benefit of accessing and storing information in such data centers can
be enjoyed by everyone—as long as nation states do not interfere with the transfer
across borders of data from such centers to users located anywhere in the world. In
this and other respects, the Aspen IDEA Principles aspire to translate technological
innovation into sound policies for every nation.
The normal caveats of criminal sanction must apply: no one wants data centers
to be havens for lawbreakers. But underlying the Aspen IDEA Principles is the
concern that national efforts to require data to be sited within national boundaries
may lead to the denial of market access, or limit citizens in some countries from
full use of the Internet.
This topic alone will attract much discussion, debate and detailed deliberation
in years to come. Some nations will want to tax cross-border transfer of data.
Some will want to impose privacy rules on firms that store individual data and, by
doing so, oblige firms to create data centers within the boundaries of any nation
in which they do business. Others may want to deny access to national markets for
firms that want to offer software, platform or infrastructure as a service. The IDEA
Principles express disapproval of all such initiatives, while explicitly endorsing the
power of governments to protect their citizens from illegal activity through the
medium of the Internet.
In spirit and in objective, the Aspen IDEA Principles and those emerging from
the OECD are consistent. Both of these statements have much more useful detail
than other efforts have produced. Most importantly, they both endorse multistakeholder
governance. This represents a dramatic departure from the way telecommunications
and media historically were governed nationally and internationally.
Use and Limitations of the Aspen IDEA (and Other) Principles
Principles alone may be insufficient in the absence of an enforcement mechanism.
Various governments still contend that nation states must regulate the
Internet to preserve its benefits and preclude its use by bad actors. They suggest
that without the attentive bureaucracies and enforcement authority of government,
the Internet will devolve into chaos. These governments describe a choice:
give up the flexible, dynamic, bottom-up evolution that has allowed the Internet to
become a major feature of the social and economic landscape, or watch it dissolve
into a swamp of lawlessness. The Aspen IDEA Project rejected this pessimistic view
of multistakeholder governance under guiding principles. There are at least three
benefits to widespread agreement as to principles and to their continued development
through the multistakeholder processes.
24 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
First, any firm, group, or individual can use these Principles as a guide to selfdirected
behavior. The more detailed the principles, the easier for a single firm
to align its conduct with the prevailing practice. An initially loose coordination
around principles could evolve into a self-organizing, coherent, cognizable code
of good behavior—without requiring that any government put the code into
law.
Second, anyone accepting the Principles can cite them as support for action
challenged by others. If a company is shut out of markets because of national
regulations requiring storage of personal data on local servers, it can point to the
IDEA Principles on market access in its petition to the authorities for relief. If a
government requests that a company remove content that the company believes
falls within the boundaries of free expression, that company can cite IDEA
Principles on the free flow of information to justify its refusal to comply. It is far
from unusual in international law to refer to norms, and codes of conduct, as part
of governments reaching reasoned conclusions about right acts.
Third, the IDEA Principles can be adopted by any nation state or multistakeholder
organization as a regulatory paradigm or a charter for collective action.
Their scale, scope and genesis are robust enough that nations and organizations
need not repeat the process by which they were generated. Instead, beginning
with the Principles, nations and organizations then could choose to tailor them to
address specific problems in specific situations.
The IDEA Principles can be adopted by any nation state or
multistakeholder organization as a regulatory paradigm or
a charter for collective action.
However, unendorsed principles do not readily lead to mutual accountability
among diverse actors. When Egypt severed all of its Internet connections and shut
down its cellular services in response to political protests in January 2011,9 it probably
would have been ideal if a multistakeholder body had convened to mobilize a
common response. It would have been useful if a multistakeholder group’s charter
obliged that participants frame a response. If the firms that effectively operated
the Internet in Egypt had endorsed the Aspen IDEA Principles, they might have
been aware that complying with the instructions of the Egyptian state put them in
9. Christopher Rhoads and Geoffrey Fowler, “Egypt Shuts Down Internet, Cellphone Services,” Wall Street
Journal, January 29, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703956604576110453371369740.
html.
The Report 25
conflict with what they had endorsed. That might have led them to discuss ways to
oppose collectively the demands of the Egyptian state. They could have said (with
the strength of numbers), if the government of Egypt terminated Internet traffic,
they must collectively and publicly state their opposition.
By contrast, when a government singles out a firm as a danger to the state, it
is extremely difficult for it to respond in any way other than by obedience to the
demands of the accusatory state. The individual firm may depend on a government
license to do business. Its employees and business partners may be at risk if
the firm does not submit to the state. And any single firm may face the prospect
that the accusing state can elevate a commercial rival into a superior situation if
it does not comply with whatever demands are made. While Google tangled with
China over banned search terms, the Chinese search company Baidu profited
immensely, at Google’s expense, in the Chinese search market.10 When a critical
mass of firms has endorsed the Aspen IDEA Principles, however, an attack on one
may be deemed an attack on all. A single firm then could call on all signatories to
declare support for the IDEA Principles. If they did act collectively, the state might
find that it had more to lose from the resistance of all firms than it could gain by
bending the single firm to its will.
Next Steps—What Is Left to Do
There is still work to be done on the Aspen IDEA Principles. Progress should
be made in the areas of consistency across other statements of principles, more
precise classification of principles, clearer details and broader explicit consensus.
Consistency. The Aspen IDEA Project recognized that the time was not ripe
for a full agreement. The participants were pressed for time. The parties were still
divided on important issues, and the Principles will need to evolve in tandem with
technological and political circumstances. The Aspen IDEA Principles will benefit
from deeper analysis and comparison with the larger ecosystem of Internet-related
principles. Various stakeholder groups, in both the private and public sectors, are
regularly proposing new sets of principles. Mapping the areas of convergence and
conflict among these sets will make clear where challenges remain and where the
path for progress is clear.
Classification. The Principles would benefit from separation into finer categories
for application to specific circumstances. Those addressing more high-level
ideas should serve as general guides to the policy process and will remain relevant
for years to come. Narrower, more specific directives will provide clearer direction
for implementation. These more specific principles probably will require more
10. Alexandra Stevenson, “China: Google’s Loss Is Baidu’s Gain,” Financial Times, July 19, 2010, http://blogs.
ft.com/beyond-brics/2010/07/19/google-back-in-china-but-faces-steep-competition/#axzz1gdJvma2g.
26 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
frequent revision as technology and circumstances change. Drawing lines between
general and specific principles, analogous to the demarcation between statutes and
regulation, will increase the value of both.
Clarification. Some areas of the Principles require more deliberation. For example,
to achieve closure in the Trusted Environment category, the Principles need
a more complete policymaking guide. Stakeholders in the global digital economy
also must further develop national security, privacy and intellectual property principles.
Avoiding such issues will lead to less consensus around the other principles.
Consensus. Ultimately, the IDEA Principles need strong, widespread support
by the Aspen participants and from others that were not around the Aspen IDEA
table. It is particularly important to involve those from all sectors outside the
United States and Europe. Either by acts of individual leadership, or by a collective
multistakeholder process, a broad consensus is necessary. Indeed, if parties in the
Aspen IDEA Project do not lead the refinement and consensus-building process,
they may find that suboptimal principles emerge as normative practice in the
Internet ecosystem. (Such unfortunate behavior occurs all too often in commons,
whether an ocean of water is the example or an ocean of data is the case in point.)
Moreover, the Aspen IDEA and OECD Principles, and other competing principles
in global discourse, need support from relevant NGOs and by the overwhelming
majority of nations. NGOs are numerous, but many are inadequately or intermittently
funded. Foundation or corporate support probably will be required to allow
many NGOs to participate fully and effectively in multistakeholder forums. NGOs
are inconsistently invited to participate as equal participants in relevant processes,
especially NGOs based in developing countries. Many of them represent important
points of view, but if their presence is not robust and continuous, or if they are
not able to commit some constituencies to concrete principles, their views may be
unheard or dismissed too easily. Yet NGOs are central to the genesis and governance
of the Internet. If the NGO role is to remain as constructive as it has been historically,
relevant parties should strengthen NGOs through inclusion and financial support.
The lack of binding participation in principle formation by most nation states,
particularly in the developing world, is difficult to address without invoking the
presence of existing bodies like the United Nations, or its authorized extensions,
such as the International Telecommunications Union (ITU). But the principle of
multistakeholder governance by definition denies control of the Internet to the UN
or the ITU, even if these venerable organizations were to seek such authority over the
Internet. Voluntary government participation can produce important and widely
attended events like the Internet Governance Forum in Nairobi in 2011, but a reliable
method to ensure widespread government participation still needs to be found.
The Report 27
Issues of Implementation of Principles
Statement of Problem of Implementation
The goal of the Aspen IDEA Project was to engage governments, business and
civil society in the design of principles and in the development of a governance
system that would fairly and efficiently implement them. The threats described
below are real and cannot be ignored. Thus, in addition to the development of the
Aspen IDEA Principles, an underlying theme throughout the course of the Project
was the search for a way to implement them through a multistakeholder entity
(“MSE”) model of Internet governance. To pass muster, the resulting governance
structure needs to be able to effectively resolve hard cases that deviate from generally
accepted principles.
…governance by MSEs acknowledges the right of
everyone—companies, civil society and governments—
to participate in the policy-making process….
The participants understood the importance of the implementation issue. It was
the focus of the November 2011 Washington, D.C. Plenary Session. From the start,
the Project explored trade-based solutions that could be embedded in a broader
agreement on national policies and their implementation. The Aspen IDEA participants
recognized that a trade-only solution was unfeasible. Thus, the Project
considered existing and evolving forms of multistakeholder Internet governance.
Simply put, the governance by MSEs acknowledges the right of everyone—
companies, civil society and governments—to participate in the policy-making
process related to issues with which they choose to be concerned. However, the
MSE concept is vague (to a degree, purposefully so), lacks operational clarity and
leaves open many questions: What are the respective roles of the various actors?
Should governments be an active participant in the process? What procedures
should be used? What are the binding or enforcement mechanisms that need to be
in place? These and other questions were debated during the course of the Project
and elsewhere.11
To some, MSE governance is inadequate. It can seem like democracy to those
who do not favor democracy, but it smacks of technological colonialism to those
who vividly recall imperialist subjection. The open, transparent nature of MSE
11. See Wolfgang Kleinwächter, ed., Internet Policy Making, Multistakeholder Internet Dialog, Co:llaboratory
Discussion Paper Series No. 1, 2, (Hamburg, Germany: Internet & Society Co:llaboratory, 2011), http://
en.collaboratory.de/publications/discussion_papers.
28 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
governance has few supporters among the unelected, or undemocratically elected,
governmental leaders who assert sovereignty over most of the world’s people.
Still, there is a recognized body of law and practice on MSE governance. Several
examples exist in the Internet area. Even though no single comprehensive set of
MSE practices exist, and no vote was taken, certain parameters emerged:
…the only plausible Internet governance plan includes
both government and nongovernmental agents.
First, technological advances do not necessarily produce positive results for
humanity. As Secretary Clinton explained in detail, collective human action is
essential for the Internet to deliver good outcomes.
Second, the only plausible Internet governance plan includes both government
and nongovernmental agents. Government has a necessary role in vindicating
various rights and seeking certain sound outcomes. Nongovernmental actors
operate the Internet, create value on its platform and, at a bare minimum, address
transborder issues that no single government can manage.
Third, outcomes matter. If the Internet culture cannot solve the problems of
market access, property rights and individual freedom, then its governance must
evolve to produce solutions. The test of effective MSE governance is its results.
Alternatives to Multistakeholder Governance
As the Internet’s effect on commerce and individuals continues to grow, nation
states are showing increasing interest in asserting their jurisdiction over it. A legitimate
and important role for governments must be defined, partly to enhance the
capability of the Internet to affect the world for good instead of ill, and partly to
establish appropriate limits on governmental action. The line must be drawn with
special care in the areas of privacy, security and the protection of property rights.
In the absence of a positive plan, negative initiatives might proliferate.
…in the absence of a positive plan, negative initiatives
might proliferate.
For example, China, Russia and other nations are pushing for the establishment
of a more formal international management system for the Internet. They may
The Report 29
want to house such a function in the United Nations.12 India, with the support of
Brazil and South Africa, has suggested the creation of a United Nations Committee
for Internet-Related Policies, reporting directly to the UN General Assembly and
run by the organization’s staff and using its funding.13 Despite a mixed response
from other authorities, these three nations have vowed to bring Internet governance
under broader state control.14
A venue for the debate of such proposals is the ITU World Conference on
International Telecommunications in late 2012. The ITU proposes that nations
will renegotiate the International Telecom Regulations (ITRs). The United States’
position, supported by other like-minded governments, is that only minor changes
should be made to the ITRs. The ITU’s Secretary-General has stated that a substantial
expansion of the treaty’s scope is necessary.15 Given its existing treatybased
authority over digital networks, the ITU, governed by its member states, is
unlikely to adopt multistakeholder governance as the central method to guide the
future of the Internet.
Further, the ITU World Conference could seek actions that run counter to the
Aspen IDEA Principles, the OECD Communiqué16 or any other widely accepted
statement of operational conducts and values. Russia, China, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan set forth their own proposal for Internet norms before the United
Nations General Assembly in September 2011. This “International Code of Conduct
for International Security” does support some goals shared by the United States and
other nations favoring an open Internet, such as protecting critical infrastructure.
But it pushes for “information security” to curb any action that “undermines other
nations’ political, economic and social stability, as well as their spiritual and cultural
environment.”17 This proposal is distinctly not consistent with the Aspen IDEA
Principles. If the Russia-China policy becomes a part of the Internet’s culture, the
impact on international human rights and digital commerce could be devastating.
Until recently, conflicts over culture and governance of the Internet were largely
hypothetical. But in the past decade challenges to the seamless and open Internet
proliferated. China’s restrictions on Internet traffic are bold and at odds with the
12. Jason Healey, “Breakthrough or Just Broken? China and Russia’s UNGA Proposal on Cyber Norms,” New
Atlanticist, http://www.acus.org/new_atlanticist/breakthrough-or-just-broken-china-and-russias-unga-proposal-
cyber-norms.
13. Kieren McCarthy, “India Formally Proposes Government Takeover of Internet,” .nxt, October 27, 2011,
http://news.dot-nxt.com/2011/10/27/india-proposes-government-control-internet.
14. T. Ramachandran, “Plan for New Global Body to Oversee Internet Governance Evokes Mixed Response,” The
Hindu, October 23, 2011, http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/internet/article2565390.ece.
15. David A. Gross and M. Ethan Lucarelli, “The 2012 World Conference on International Telecommunications:
Another Brewing Storm Over Potential UN Regulation of the Internet,” Who’s Who Legal, November 2011,
http://www.wileyrein.com/publications.cfm?sp=articles&id=7630.
16. “Communique on Principles for Internet Policy-Making,” OECD High Level Meeting, Paris, France, June
28-29, 2011, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/33/12/48387430.pdf.
17. Jason Healey, “Breakthrough or Just Broken? China and Russia’s UNGA Proposal on Cyber Norms,” New
Atlanticist, http://www.acus.org/new_atlanticist/breakthrough-or-just-broken-china-and-russias-unga-proposal-
cyber-norms.
30 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Aspen IDEA Principles. China, for example, has publicly announced the blocking
of websites based outside of China that are trying to enter the Chinese market,
including Facebook, Twitter and Skype.18
Even governments that usually support the free flow of information sometime
diverge from the Aspen IDEA Principles. Riots in London in early 2011 prompted
the United Kingdom’s prime minister initially to blame Twitter and Facebook for
facilitating disorder. He floated their suppression as a means of preventing future
riots.19 The EU is apparently considering imposing restrictions on data storage
location that in practice may create market access limitations on cloud computing
in Europe. And in August 2011, San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit authorities
shuttered mobile-Internet and phone service in an attempt to quash a demonstration.
The FCC is now investigating this issue.20
State actors also threaten security. The United States Congress recently alleged
that China and Russia are responsible for cyber-espionage campaigns against
American companies.21 Government incursions on the basic structure of the
Internet impede the free flow of information and reduce the safety of conducting
business online. These threats to the Internet culture’s survival are likely to become
more frequent in the absence of both a wider base of support for the Principles and
a greater consensus of opinion around multistakeholder governance.
…threats to the Internet culture’s survival are likely
to become more frequent. …
Consideration of Trade Agreements as an Internet Governance Mechanism
The Aspen IDEA Project began by seeking consensus around a trade agreement
that emphasized market access for broadband at the hardware, software and content
levels (see the Aspen IDEA Framework Paper in the appendix.) The notion was that
by means of a trade regime, the Principles could be exported into the economy and
18. Malcolm Moore, “China Makes Skype Illegal,” The Telegraph, December 30, 2010, http://www.telegraph.
co.uk/technology/internet/8231444/China-makes-Skype-illegal.html.
19. Elizabeth Montalbano, “U.K. Prime Minister Floats Blackberry, Twitter Crackdown,” Information Week,
August 11, 2011, http://www.informationweek.com/news/government/policy/231400063.
20. Julius Genachowski, “Statement on BART Policy Adoption,” Federal Communications Commission,
December 1, 2011, http://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-chairman-julius-genachowskis-statement-bart-policyadoption.
21. Fahmida Y. Rashid, “U.S. Congressional Report Accuses China, Russia of Cyber-Espionage,” eWeek,
November 11, 2011, http://www.eweek.com/c/a/Security/US-Congressional-Report-Accuses-China-Russiaof-
CyberEspionage-809875/.
The Report 31
national legal regime of every signatory country. A single digital economy would
emerge. It would promote respect for rights of property, privacy and security, as
well as human rights, and would utilize an existing enforcement regime. This aspiration
was based in large part on the success of the WTO Basic Telecom Agreement
of 1997. Under this precedent, a multilateral trade agreement could be linked to
behavioral principles stated in a reference paper. This technique was endorsed by
a former United States Trade Representative in the Project’s final plenary meeting.
Agreement on a trade agenda failed to materialize in the IDEA Project for at
least two reasons. First, a global trade agenda was severely hampered by the worst
economic downturn in decades. Neither business nor government could mobilize
the will to take action in this new topic area at such a trying time.
Second, even as threats to a seamless Internet gathered strength globally, competing
and unharmonious perspectives emerged within the United States concerning
the reach of domestic jurisdiction over even the physical platforms that
underlie the workings of the Internet. A successful trade agenda depends on an
underlying consensus on both a regulatory framework and an implementation
process. That has not yet happened. Moreover, some Aspen IDEA Project participants
thought that the lack of consensus domestically about Internet governance
meant that the United States could no longer serve as the undisputed “demander”
and leader in global negotiations. After all, the Internet is global today, and therefore
many nations, alone or in coordination, could lead trade-based approaches
to addressing the need for governance. However, in the last few years, Europe
has become even more riven by political disharmony than the United States. As
a result, no country or region has successfully assumed the role of leader in setting
an aggressive global trade agenda for the digital economy, or even specifically
sought to champion market access for Internet firms.
Nevertheless, trade remains a fruitful means for supporting the open Internet.
Trade agreements can combat both traditional roadblocks to commerce and
newer threats that could cause more damage to the digital economy. Tariffs and
regulatory barriers such as interconnection rules, restrictions on foreign ownership
of networks and limits on investment in infrastructure deleteriously affect
the Internet, and these barriers are traditional subjects of trade negotiations. New
technical barriers to trade present a particular threat to the Internet. Among other
issues, differing technical requirements for the same equipment and services prevent
firms from introducing new goods and services to improve the platform.
Trade regimes have enforcement mechanisms that multistakeholder governance
lacks. Trade can also have an important influence on the development of
the digital economy. The principles that undergird trade decisions can become
norms that guide nation states’ domestic governance, laying a foundation for
future decisions.
32 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Perspective of Current Trade Officials. High-level trade officials were active
participants in the Aspen IDEA Plenary Sessions. Miriam Sapiro, Deputy U.S.
Trade Representative, and Christine Bliss, Assistant U.S. Trade Representative,
provided valuable background and advice at the Plenary Sessions. They stressed
that recent initiatives are attempting to integrate the global trade regime with the
Internet.
For example, multiple efforts have addressed protection of intellectual property
rights internationally. The Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) set rules applying intellectual property law to all members of the WTO
as part of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994. In 1996,
the WTO signed an agreement with the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) to encourage broader understanding and implementation of TRIPS
and other Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) rules, including technical support.22
More recently, the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) has provided
additional support, with its current participants, including the new addition of
Russia,23 representing more than half of global trade in goods.24 Bilateral agreements
have also bolstered the effectiveness of IPR initiatives. Nearly all U.S. bilateral
trade agreements created in the last decade contain requirements that both
nations sign key WIPO treaties.25
Regional organizations have adopted rules extending support of free digital
trade beyond where broad multilateral consensus is possible. The Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC), established in 1989, has made progress on
Internet and technology-related issues. APEC’s 2005 Privacy Framework establishes
standards similar to OECD standards previously set on the topic with the
important inclusion of China and other nations that have caused concern over
treatment of user data.26 The group continues efforts to coordinate more coherent
policymaking among its 21 member nations.27
Bilateral agreements have also made some progress in the digital economy.
22. “Agreement Between the World Intellectual Property and the World Trade Organization,” World Trade
Organization, 1995, http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel3_e.htm.
23. Miriam Sapiro, “Intellectual Property Protections in the Digital Age,” (Speech, St. Petersburg International
Economic Forum, St. Petersburg, Russia, June 18, 2011), http://www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-office/speeches/
transcripts/2011/june/remarks-ambassador-miriam-sapiro-st-petersburg.
24. Miriam Sapiro, “Challenges to Global Economic Governance: Trade and Monetary Aspects,” (Speech,
Eleventh Annual Herzliya Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, February 8, 2011), http://www.ustr.gov/about-us/
press-office/speeches/transcripts/2011/february/remarks-ambassador-miriam-sapiro-eleventh-a.
25. Sacha Wunsch-Vincent and Arno Hold, “Towards Coherent Rules for Digital Trade: Building on Efforts in
Multilateral Versus Preferential Trade Negotiations,” Working Paper no. 2011/64, Swiss National Centre of
Competence and Research: Trade Regulation, July 4, 2011, http://www.nccr-trade.org/publication/towardscoherent-
rules-for-digital-trade-building-on-efforts-in-multilateral-versus-preferential-tr/.
26. Graham Greenleaf, “APEC Privacy Framework Completed: No Threat to Privacy Standards,” Privacy Law and
Policy Reporter, 2006, http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/PLPR/2006/5.html.
27. Ron Kirk, “Remarks to the Consumer Electronics Show,” (Speech, Las Vegas, NV, January 8, 2011), http://
www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-office/speeches/transcripts/2011/january/remarks-ambassador-ron-kirk-consumer-
electro.
The Report 33
Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) between individual nations allow governments
to settle issues on which broader negotiations fail to reach consensus, such
as the application of other WTO rules to digital transactions. PTAs have provided
a venue for experimentation with new terms, pushing forward the development
of e-commerce-related terms. The United States has spearheaded this approach,
negotiating agreements with a number of key partners that include provisions
for everything from improving domestic regulatory processes to removing location
requirements for online suppliers.28 Other nations have similar agreements
enacted or pending, demonstrating the influence of these “laboratories” for innovative
trade solutions.29 A United States agreement with Korea is a recent example,
breaking down technical barriers to trade, settling intellectual property enforcement
questions, and establishing momentum for further change in the region.30
Other newer initiatives are being pursued to update trade relationships, harmonize
trade rules on a global scale and strengthen enforcement of existing rules. For
example, in November 2011 President Obama announced that nine nations had
agreed to a firm outline for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a forward-looking trade
agreement among Australia, Brunei, Chile, Malaysia, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore,
Vietnam and the United Sates. The agreement builds upon the work of APEC, covering
all sectors of the member nations’ economies but saving special focus for ICT.
Current work between the United States and the European Union is leading
to new options for trade discussions concerning the digital economy. The
Transatlantic Economic Counsel (TEC), the organization behind the Internetbased
trade principles discussed above, is pursuing ongoing projects on innovation
policy and intellectual property protection. Leaders of the United States and the
European Union met in November 2011 to issue a directive for TEC to establish
a High Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth, focusing on tech-driven
emerging sectors.31 A new forum under TEC, the Transatlantic Innovation Action
Partnership (TIAP), is using multistakeholder discussions between top-level government
representatives and technology experts to break down barriers in the trade
of raw materials necessary for production of new technologies and to increase communication
about geographic areas where innovation is flourishing.32 Although all
market sectors are not covered, these initiatives promise to strengthen the already
strong trade relationship between the United States and the European Union.
28. Sacha Wunsch-Vincent and Arno Hold, “Towards Coherent Rules for Digital Trade: Building on Efforts in
Multilateral Versus Preferential Trade Negotiations,” Working Paper no. 2011/64, Swiss National Centre of
Competence and Research: Trade Regulation, July 4, 2011, http://www.nccr-trade.org/publication/towardscoherent-
rules-for-digital-trade-building-on-efforts-in-multilateral-versus-preferential-tr/.
29. Wunsch-Vincent and Hold.
30. Kirk, op cit.
31. The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Joint Statement: US-EU Summit,” November 28, 2011,
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/11/28/joint-statement-us-eu-summit.
32. U.S. Department of State, “Transatlantic Innovation Action Partnership Work Plan,” December 17, 2010,
http://www.state.gov/p/eur/rls/or/153327.htm.
34 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Another important area of progress in trade is the enforcement of existing
agreements. Digital commerce has been a leading source of compliance controversy
in trade. Enforcement of TRIPS-consistent laws, rather than the establishment
of those laws, is the central problem in intellectual property rights protection.33
In recent years, digital trade and the Internet have been among the leading causes
of service-related WTO disputes.34 The United States has also taken advantage of
WTO rules allowing enforcement pressure without formally filing a dispute. In
October 2011, the United States sought detailed information from China on the
impact of Chinese policies that may block American companies’ websites. Given
the importance to American businesses of online access to the enormous Chinese
market, ensuring that China acts in accordance with related GATS provisions is
crucial. The GATS contains a provision requiring China, a WTO participant, to
respond promptly to the request.35 Without making sure that key participants are
following trade rules, there is little point to setting them in the first place.
Limitations of a Trade Solution. Although trade negotiations continue to
attempt to ease digital commerce among nations, certain aspects of the traditional
trade system limit their effectiveness. These issues have historically prevented trade
from addressing the full spectrum of challenges facing international commerce
and civil society. Overcoming them is an important challenge for policy makers
and stakeholders.36
Trade agreement structures leave room for gaps and exceptions that hamper
their effectiveness. Gaps can be created by the need for consensus, as negotiating
parties avoid certain topics, or willfully ignore controversial issues. Because
governments are bound only to the final agreements they sign, these gaps lead
to uncertainty even if other countries have committed to certain behaviors. Even
after parties agree to basic terms, exemptions built into agreements provide more
exceptions for countries not interested in committing to full compliance. Both
the GATS and TRIPS contain articles that allow a country to avoid treaty provisions
that violate the country’s “public morals,” but neither document contains
adequate explanation of what that term means.
Another issue is the national security exception present in every trade accord.
By shifting goods and services into the military category, nations can avoid bans
33. U.S. Department of Commerce, “Overview of Intellectual Property Rights and the TRIPs Agreement,” August
12, 2002, http://www.osec.doc.gov/ogc/occic/ipr.htm.
34. Sacha Wunsch-Vincent and Arno Hold, “Towards Coherent Rules for Digital Trade: Building on Efforts in
Multilateral Versus Preferential Trade Negotiations,” Working Paper no. 2011/64, Swiss National Centre of
Competence and Research: Trade Regulation, July 4, 2011, http://www.nccr-trade.org/publication/towardscoherent-
rules-for-digital-trade-building-on-efforts-in-multilateral-versus-preferential-tr/.
35. Office of the United States Trade Representative, “United States Seeks Detailed Information on China’s
Internet Restrictions,” October 19, 2011, http://www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-office/press-releases/2011/
october/united-states-seeks-detailed-information-china%E2%80%99s-i.
36. See Peter F. Cowhey and Jonathan D. Aronson with Donald Abelson, Transforming Global Information and
Communications, (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009).
The Report 35
on tariffs and industry subsidies.37 ICT industries, where new technologies are
likely to have defense as well as civil applications, may be more vulnerable to such
potential tactics. Using these gaps and exceptions, countries can avoid conforming
to broadly accepted principles of Internet governance while still technically
complying with trade agreements.
After entering an agreement and navigating multiple exceptions, a trade agreement
provision must also deal with enforcement and compliance problems. The
WTO’s Trade Policy Review Mechanism regularly reviews the trade policies of
member nations and requires nations to offer explanations for inconsistencies.
However, the process offers only transparency and does not lead to enforcement
of rules against violators. Cases often drag on for years before any sanctions are
issued (notwithstanding major reforms to the system in 1995).38 Ultimately, the
significant power that countries have to enforce WTO agreements and dispute
settlements is the threat of retaliation by imposing additional trade barriers. This
tit-for-tat tactic leaves smaller nations, who lack economic force behind their
policy threats, with little protection at all.39 Yet there are many small nations for
which access to a single global digital economy is especially valuable.
A history of tension between trade agreements and human rights further
complicates this system. The WTO is not a human rights organization, and its
agreements do not explicitly reference human rights.40 Historically there has been
conflict between human rights and agreements in several areas of trade, and that
conflict continues in such areas as intellectual property. Human rights advocates
have made TRIPS and other treaty provisions key to the ICT industry the subject
of significant critique.41 Human rights also interact with trade agreement exceptions
in ways that further complicate enforcement.
These drawbacks or limitations of a trade regime are not new, nor are they likely
to be resolved in the near future. The trade regimes should help sustain a single
digital economy. However, ensuring that nations act in accordance with all desirable
principles likely will require more mechanisms for implementation than the
trade arena provides.
37. John Feffer, “Globalization & Militarization,” Foreign Policy in Focus, October 4, 2005, http://www.fpif.org/
reports/globalization_militarization.
38. Mostafa Beshkar and Eric W. Bond, “The Theory of Dispute Resolution With Application to Intellectual
Property Rights,” in Intellectual Property, Growth and Trade, ed. Keith Eugene Maskus, (Amsterdam, Elsevier,
2008), 394.
39. Bernard M. Hoekman and Petros C. Mavroidis, “WTO Dispute Settlement, Transparency and Surveillance,”
The World Economy, 23, no. 4, November 19, 1999.
40. Cephas Lumina, “Free Trade or Just Trade? The World Trade Organisation, Human Rights and Development
(Part 1),” 32, http://www.ajol.info/index.php/ldd/article/viewFile/52892/41493.
41. Lumina, op cit. 29
36 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Solving for Multistakeholder Entity (MSE) Governance
Advantages and Disadvantages. Whatever their membership, goals and decision-
making structures, different Multistakeholder Entities (MSEs) have similar
advantages and disadvantages. Multistakeholder governance can embody democratic
processes in a way not practically possible in any governmental system.42 By
shifting control away from a top-down system in which a single authority sets agendas
and provides the final word on solutions, MSEs facilitate dialogue about institutional
priorities. Because MSEs permit all ideas to be advanced, they can encourage
more creative solutions to problems. Their flexible structures and lack of bureaucratic
formality can allow them to bring debates to conclusion with dispatch.43
But MSEs are self-organized; they do not necessarily have legitimacy, respect or
persuasive power. They may lack financial and other resources. Participants may
not necessarily represent all stakeholders whose interests are implicated in an MSE’s
decisions. Organizers may not find a good balance between the inclusion of all
stakeholders and the need to deliver consensus. Organizers who lack authority may
find that their judgment calls are influenced by the need to avoid criticism from
one party or another.44 In some MSEs, the stakeholders with the greatest influence
on decision making are also the parties that the resulting rules or principles are
intended to govern. In these cases, questions of accountability arise, particularly
when procedural controls may not be as strict as in other governing bodies.45
Because MSEs permit all ideas to be advanced, they can
encourage more creative solutions to problems.
Some governmental bodies have also begun to question MSEs’ source of
authority over the Internet, arguing that without formal cooperation with government
entities, they cannot exercise legitimate power over Internet policy making
42. Sivasubraminian Muthusamy, “Building Suitable Frameworks for Internet Governance,” in Internet Policy
Making, ed. Wolfgang Kleinwächter, Multistakeholder Internet Dialog, Co: llaboratory Discussion Paper Series
No. 1, 2, (Hamburg, Germany: Internet & Society Co: llaboratory, 2011), 81, http://en.collaboratory.de/publications/
discussion_papers.
43. Fiona Alexander, “Towards an Open and Innovative Internet,” in Internet Policy Making, ed. Wolfgang
Kleinwächter, Multistakeholder Internet Dialog, Co: llaboratory Discussion Paper Series No. 1, 2, (Hamburg,
Germany: Internet & Society Co: llaboratory, 2011), 28.
44. Bertrand de La Chapelle, “Multistakeholder Governance,” in Internet Policy Making, ed. Wolfgang
Kleinwächter, Multistakeholder Internet Dialog, Co: llaboratory Discussion Paper Series No. 1, 2, (Hamburg,
Germany: Internet & Society Co: llaboratory, 2011), 22–23.
45. Edward J. Balleisen and Marc Eisner, “The Promise and Pitfalls of Co-Regulation: How Governments Can
Draw on Private Governance for Public Purpose,” in Internet Policy Making, ed. Wolfgang Kleinwächter,
Multistakeholder Internet Dialog, Co: llaboratory Discussion Paper Series No. 1, 2, (Hamburg, Germany:
Internet & Society Co: llaboratory, 2011), 135.
The Report 37
for much longer.46 Finally, MSEs lack readily accepted methods of enforcing their
decisions. Nevertheless, despite all these disadvantages, MSEs can run on their
record. For 20 years, they have played a major and largely successful role in the
development of today’s Internet.
Current MSE Initiatives. Several of the MSEs that have helped define the
Internet from its inception continue to shape its evolution. What is now a structure
of independent entities began as an amalgam of small boards and advisory panels
created by the United States government to oversee management of the Internet.
In 1992, members of these groups, who reside in many countries, founded the
Internet Society (ISOC), a not-for-profit organization, in order to host a continuing
discussion of the Internet’s legal, political, economic and social implications.
ISOC provides an overarching legal and fiscal structure for the groups that directly
manage the Internet’s functioning.47 Under ISOC, the Internet Architecture Board
(IAB) is in charge of the technical and engineering development of the Internet,
overseeing work by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and other task
forces.48 Together, the multiple MSEs functioning under ISOC form a network of
linked organizations, each with specific responsibilities for guiding the Internet’s
everyday functioning.
Of the MSEs, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN) has one of the longest track records, dating back to the 1990s. ICANN
originally was a creation of the United States government, but has expanded its
board and procedures to be a more international body. It oversees new Internet
domain registrations and IP addresses within those domains. In November 2011,
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), the
Department of Commerce’s expert on Internet governance, announced that the
contract giving ICANN authority over the domain name system would be open
to competitive bidding. It is unlikely that another organization would be able
to match ICANN’s resources and expertise closely enough to win the contract.
However, NTIA and Commerce want ICANN to be more responsive to the government’s
requests for information and to provide more reasoned and thorough
explanations of its decisions.49
Started in 1994, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) also provided early
technical guidance for the Internet. The organization now has offices around the
world and members from businesses, universities, governmental entities and civil
46. Catherine Trautmann, “Multistakeholderism Needs Fundamental and Decisive Legitimation,” in Internet
Policy Making, ed. Wolfgang Kleinwächter, Multistakeholder Internet Dialog, Co: llaboratory Discussion
Paper Series No. 1, 2, (Hamburg, Germany: Internet & Society Co: llaboratory, 2011), 33-35.
47. Internet Society, “Who We Are,” Accessed March 16, 2012, http://www.isoc.org/isoc/.
48. Internet Architecture Board, “Overview,” Accessed March 16, 2012, http://www.iab.org/about/iab-overview/.
49. Kristin Weinberger, “A Full Guide to the New IANA Contract,” .nxt, November 17, 2011, http://news.dotnxt.
com/2011/11/17/full-guide-iana-contract.
38 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
society groups as well as interested individuals. W3C does face challenges and criticism.
Stakeholders have raised concerns about the organization’s effectiveness in
keeping standards up to date.50 Some believe the balance of power in its decisionmaking
process needs to be altered.51
A newer generation of MSEs has begun to address other areas. One relatively
new participant in the field, the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), has dramatically
expanded participation in the international discussion over the Internet’s
future. In 2006, the United Nations established the IGF in response to a 2005
report from the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). The IGF’s
central body is its Multistakeholder Advisory Group (MAG), made up of 46 representatives
from government, business and civil society, and in which all members
participate in equal standing. IGF’s “dynamic coalitions,” addressing specific
issues of concern such as privacy and linguistic diversity, generally allow participation
by any interested individual. The Forum’s annual meetings have generated
unprecedented participation from citizens around the world. More than 2,000
participants attended the 2011 meeting in Nairobi, Kenya.
Part of the reason the IGF has succeeded in fostering free dialogue about
Internet governance may be its disinclination to seek policy-binding consensus.
This may also be one of the IGF’s major limitations. The lack of pressure to negotiate
binding rules allows freer communication and the inclusion of many stakeholders
otherwise not included in the Internet governance process, but it may not
be an adequate way to implement key Internet-related principles. However, the
IGF has demonstrated a significant “soft power” ability to define key issues and
shape norms among the diverse parties it draws to the conversation.52
The Global Network Initiative (GNI) is an international multistakeholder effort
at safeguarding freedom of expression and personal privacy against government
restrictions. In 2008, Microsoft, Yahoo and Google announced the creation of
GNI.53 GNI’s initial mission was to create core documents laying out principles,
50. Vlad Alexander, “Why Is the HTML Specification a Failure?” Rebuilding the Web, October 27, 2009, http://
rebuildingtheweb.com/en/html-spec-failure/. Also, companies focused on solutions to immediate technical
problems have also expressed worry that W3C’s more creative and far-thinking projects draw the
organization’s resources away from the creation of practical solutions. See Antone Gonsalves, “W3C Work
on Semantic Web Draws Criticism,” Information Week, April 8, 2003, http://www.informationweek.com/
news/8600230.
51. Paul Festa, “Critics Clamor for Web Services Standards,” CNET News, February 12, 2002, http://news.cnet.
com/2100-1023-834990.html. For faint praise of the W3C’s improvements in access to more diverse stakeholders,
see Molly E. Holzschlag, “Misplaced Anger: A Rebuttal to Zeldman’s Criticism of the W3C,” The
Web Standards Project, July 26, 2006, http://www.webstandards.org/2006/07/26/misplaced-anger-a-rebuttalto-
zeldmans-criticism-of-the-w3c/.
52. Wolfgang Benedek, Veronika Bauer and Matthias C. Ketteman (eds.), Internet Governance and the Information
Society: Global perspectives and European Dimensions, (Utrecht, Netherlands: Eleven International, 2008), 76.
53. Geoffrey A. Fowler, “Parsing the Google, Yahoo, Microsoft, Global Network Initiative,” Wall Street Journal,
October 28, 2008, http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2008/10/28/parsing-the-google-yahoo-microsoft-global-
network-initiative/.
The Report 39
implementation guidelines and an accountability plan to ensure that its members
act in support of human rights worldwide.54 Despite two years of active collaboration
among representatives from business, government, academia and civil
society, the resulting documents have received mixed responses. GNI continues to
work on issues at the intersection of human rights and the Internet, requiring and
reviewing reports from its member companies, seeking new members and supporting
research on new topics.55
Even as entities such as the IGF generate broad discussion of new issues, more
focused expertise and labor may be required to make policy progress in specific
areas. The Broadband Internet Technical Advisory Group (BITAG) seeks to fill
that gap for the issue of network management. By convening committees of
technical experts to address the appropriateness of specific actions by companies
that affect online traffic flows, BITAG seeks to create certainty in a specific area of
Internet policy. BITAG’s scope is intentionally narrow and United States-focused,
at least for now.
As the current MSE landscape demonstrates, many gaps in Internet governance
cry out for their own MSEs, such as in the areas of privacy and cybersecurity.56
In order to focus the discussion on Internet governance, in the November 2011
Plenary Session, the Aspen IDEA staff presented an idea, labeled a “thought experiment,”
for implementing the Aspen IDEA Principles through MSE governance.
The Staff “Thought Experiment.” The Aspen IDEA proposal had two basic
design principles: (1) respecting national sovereignty (hence the proposal did not
depend on trade treaty-based governance) and (2) maximizing the use of expert,
pragmatic and efficient MSEs for accomplishing many of the goals of regulation
and standard setting. The building blocks of the staff proposal were MSEs called
“subject matter multistakeholder organizations” (SMOs). The SMOs would engage
in setting standards and guidelines for behavior, certify companies as complying
with national policies, certify countries as having national policies that comport
with the Principles and reach reasoned conclusions on any disputes brought to
them. The staff proposal recognized a need for “connective tissue,” i.e. the concept
of mutual recognition among the SMOs. The MSEs discussed above would be
examples of some necessary SMOs, but they would need to define their goals with
54. Global Network Initiative, “Core Commitments,” Accessed March 16, 2012, http://www.globalnetworkinitiative.
org/corecommitments/index.php.
55. For example, a report containing recommendations for companies and users regarding control of content
in online services by GNI members the Center for Democracy and Technology and the Berkman Center for
Internet & Society grew out of a GNI event on the topic. Erica Newland, Caroline Nolan, Cynthia Wong and
Jillian York, “Report on Account Deactivation and Content Removal: Guiding Principles for Companies and
Users,” Berkman Center for Internet & Society, Harvard University, September 21, 2011, http://www.globalnetworkinitiative.
org/newsandevents/Report_on_Account_Deactivation_and_Content_Removal.php.
56. See the Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement, http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/.
40 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
more precision in order to fit within the framework advanced by the staff.
As an example of such precision, an SMO might certify a company as complying
with the policies of a particular government. That country, as a participant in the
SMO, would treat such a certified company just as it would treat all other companies
in its jurisdiction. In short, it would adhere to a nondiscrimination principle.
There would be no limit to the number and variety of SMOs. The network of
SMOs would expand and evolve with technology and society. They would each
adopt the Aspen IDEA Principles as part of their charters. Thus, the Principles
would become “connective tissues” across all the SMOs.
Although a central governmental body may struggle to create a new bureaucracy
covering an emerging network technology in a short period of time, such
an SMO system would avoid delays and costs by allowing experts and interested
parties in new areas to form bodies to recommend regulatory approaches, saving
time and resources. Additionally, SMOs exist outside of the daily political
wrangling of individual governments, making them easier for companies, NGOs
and even other governments to trust as independent evaluators.57 Due to that
independence, governments may also be more willing to learn from SMOs rather
than from larger political actors. Whatever the specifics of its implementation, a
governance system for global digital communications based on SMO knowledge
and independence could reap enormous rewards for nations worldwide and the
citizens and companies they represent.
…a governance system for global digital communications
based on SMO knowledge and independence could reap
enormous rewards for nations worldwide and the citizens
and companies they represent.
Under one variation of the “thought experiment,” governments would each
enter into an identical contract with a unique SMO, called a Protocol Certification
Organization (PCO). The PCO itself would be an MSE funded by companies,
foundations and contracting nations. The PCO would foster, financially support
and assure the reasonable performance of various expert international multistakeholder
organizations, each organized around one or more of the subject matter
57. One example of an “SMO-like” body successfully operating in another field is the International Accounting
Standards Board. See www.ifrs.org.
The Report 41
topics addressed by the Principles. The PCO would rule on the reasonableness of
any SMO’s decision making, if asked to do so. The PCO would report its decision
to the public and to all the contracting governments.
Advocating the MSE Model. Despite MSEs’ expertise and history of Internet
management, their control over Internet governance is increasingly under threat.
They are not adequately prepared to defend themselves or to demonstrate their
efficacy. There is no single, central set of principles and structure for their efforts.
That is one reason to suggest that all adopt in common the Aspen IDEA or similar
Principles. MSEs are already re-litigating the same issues, using precious resources
redundantly. Nor is there a mechanism to foster collective action in interdependent
areas of concern.
There was no consensus among the IDEA participants on whether any more
“connective tissue,” vertical or horizontal, or both, should be created. Some
are optimistic that MSEs will evolve in appropriate ways to satisfy the concerns
described in this report. That may be true, but any evolution needs to occur quickly,
because the dangers to the Internet’s present and future development are real
and urgent. Moreover, important decisions need to be taken in the near future.
Generally, “plan beats no plan,” as U.S. Treasury Secretary Geithner famously said
in the most critical moments of the financial crises of 2008–2009.
In considering what plan is preferable, the Aspen IDEA Project identified at
least the following attributes as important for any MSE Internet governance structure
to be useful:
• Adherence to principles, either IDEA’s or a reasonably comparable version
• Open membership and participation
• Open processes
• Reasoned deliberation and explanation of decisions
• Acceptance of a willingness to be challenged and to have to explain processes
to other forums
• A dispute resolution mechanism
• A statement of purpose (standard setting, codes of conduct, topical focus,
and so forth)
• Support, including financial, for the continuous and well-informed participation
of civil society in sufficient form and number to accommodate
that amorphous but vibrant community within the Internet’s broader
community
• An enforcement mechanism
42 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
Stress Testing the IDEA Principles and MSE Governance
The test of any set of principles, even if all MSEs adopt them, is whether they
solve problems that most all agree need solving. This section applies the Aspen
IDEA Principles to four real world situations. The stress tests focus on the application
of the SMO concept to specific cases.
The Case of WikiLeaks
WikiLeaks is an international nonprofit media organization that publishes secret,
classified and confidential information, primarily from government sources. The
organization released documents embarrassing to the governments of Somalia,
Peru, Kenya and other nations in 2006. But its international notoriety exploded in
2010 when it released a series of documents from United States military and diplomatic
sources. These releases included video of a United States helicopter attack
on apparently unarmed Iraqi civilians and cables by State Department employees
criticizing world leaders. The Department of Justice commenced an investigation.
Political pressure mounted. Several major companies who provided services to
WikiLeaks, including Amazon, Apple, PayPal, Visa and MasterCard, terminated
their relationships with the organization. Some media and human rights organizations
also criticized WikiLeaks for failing to redact information that could harm
Afghan civilians serving as informants and other innocents. Supporters at other
publications and groups, however, welcomed the release of the information and
established mirror sites to keep the documents available online.
How should governments, businesses and other participants in the global
digital marketplace have approached this thicket of thorny issues? The Aspen
IDEA Principles provide guidance. Under the Principles, governments must balance
preservation of freedom of expression as defined in international treaties on
human rights with the need to preserve cybersecurity and national security. Above
all, any government actions regarding WikiLeaks and other online publishing of
information must be “transparent, necessary, provided for by law and consistent
with international standards on free expression and privacy.”
In the WikiLeaks case, an SMO could have struck the balance the Principles
call for. Such an SMO might have included for-profit firms and NGOs. It might
have concluded that WikiLeak’s conduct had gone too far toward disclosure of
information without considering sufficiently the national security and personal
safety concerns involved. In that case, the SMO would have declared WikiLeaks
to be unwelcome in the Internet community and thus would have legitimized
the refusal of certain important firms to provide the platforms necessary for
The Report 43
WikiLeaks. Such a process would have created a clear precedent and would
have extended the rule of law to a troublesome but important fact situation.
Governments then would benefit from the creation of clear and internationally
standardized rules for responding to situations like WikiLeaks in the future, a task
that SMOs could help accomplish.
The Case of Internet Privacy
In 2010, the Wall Street Journal investigated the use of tracking technologies and
discovered that the top 50 sites worldwide each placed an average of 64 trackers on
visitors’ computers. The Journal revealed that data-collection companies tracked the
behavior of children, collected geographic location information via mobile devices,
used deep-packet inspection to identify users across multiple devices and compiled
detailed dossiers on private individuals using social networking, résumé, government
and other sites among other potentially distressing developments. These
practices, along with evidence of similar actions, intensified the call for new privacy
rules, either from industry self-regulation or by means of legislation, or both.
The IDEA Principles regarding consumer protection and privacy speak to
these issues. Specifically, these actions by private companies revealed by the
Journal may be contrary to the IDEA Principles’ emphasis on public sector directives
to maintain enhanced consumer protection, including limits on third-party
information disclosure and respect for international standards of data treatment.
Under MSE governance, the facts would be established in an open forum.
…a specific code of conduct…would allow legitimate
business practices to proceed [and] assure individuals that
they could maintain reasonable expectations of privacy as
to their use of the Internet.
Private and public sector parties would work toward a specific code of conduct
that all relevant firms should follow. This process, if successful, would allow
legitimate business practices to proceed while at the same time it would assure
individuals that they could maintain reasonable expectations of privacy as to their
use of the Internet.
44 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
The Case of Google in China
Google began offering a Chinese version of its website in 2000, but the venture
soon faced challenges. Two years later, an investigation revealed that Chinese
Internet service providers were heavily filtering Google’s results, slowing or blocking
access for China’s 250 to 500 million Internet users. With users flocking to
Google’s competitor Baidu, a Chinese search engine, Google agreed to filtering
requirements demanded by the Chinese government in order to operate as
a licensed company in the country. In 2009, a cyberattack known as Operation
Aurora mined proprietary information from Google’s networks. This was part of a
larger series of attacks that experts suspect were carried out by the Chinese government.
Google continues to operate the Chinese version of its site with government
approval, but the governmental restrictions prevent Google from offering the value
of its search engine in competition to Baidu and new competitor GoSo.cn, owned
by one of China’s state-run media organizations.
China’s actions implicate the IDEA Principles relating to the free flow of information
and trusted environment. The Principles require that any government
restriction on the free flow of information online, including filtering of content, “be
transparent, necessary, provided for by law and consistent with international standards
on free expression and privacy.” The Operation Aurora attacks also violate
the Principle’s directive to respect the privacy of individual users and do not meet
the need for “clear, transparent and impartial laws, including due process protections
and reasonable notice” needed to preserve a trusted online environment in
regards to privacy. Finally, the Principles recommend the creation of international
standards for cybersecurity, a measure that could prevent future attacks.
SMOs may not have direct enforcement power, but they do have the ability
to influence international opinion and help build consensus. Here, SMO actions
could have drawn attention to freedom of expression issues worldwide. An
SMO on cybersecurity also could have significant impact on public opinion. By
encouraging collaboration between technical and security experts, governments
and businesses, such an SMO could facilitate the setting of security standards
and policies to prevent, identify and react to cyber-attacks quickly and effectively.
SMOs may not have direct enforcement power, but they do
have the ability to influence international opinion and help
build consensus.
Such an initiative would require significant financial and other resources, but
those investments would pay large returns in the safety of individual privacy and
The Report 45
industry secrets. Perhaps the most effective response SMOs could orchestrate
would have been a collective refusal by the global Internet community to connect
China to the rest of the world—even for a limited time period. This ostracism
might have had salutary effects.
The Case of China’s Indigenous Innovation Policies
The Chinese government has developed a strategy for “indigenous innovation”
that it hopes will allow Chinese companies to surpass current leaders in the United
States, EU and Japan in ICT and other technology innovations. A set of guidelines
created in 2006 encouraged Chinese government agencies to promote domestic
innovation companies through preferential procurement, discriminatory standardization,
tax incentives and financial support for research and development
(R&D). Holders of intellectual property interests in other nations have been particularly
concerned about China’s encouragement of “assimilating, absorbing and
re-innovating” foreign technologies into Chinese companies.
First, several Principles relating to market access speak against China’s protectionist
actions. Giving Chinese companies advantages through discriminatory
procurement and standards setting fails to preserve technological neutrality in
ICT and related markets. Second, respecting intellectual property rules in the ICT
ecosystem is key to creating the trusted environment described in the Principles.
China’s “assimilation” of technologies patented by parties in other nations may
violate various international agreements governing intellectual property use.
Existing and new SMOs could play a key role in addressing these and similar
“indigenous innovation” policies. Standards-setting organizations, including the
IETF and other examples of multistakeholder entities in the ICT sphere, should
maintain influence over standards so as to prevent discrimination against foreign
companies and fragmentation of technology markets. Cooperation with the international
trade system can reinforce existing agreements and point to areas where
additions to agreements can make significant impacts in trade areas. A strong
“name and shame” regime generated by SMOs can draw attention to these and
other discriminatory policies, increasing pressure on nations to comply with common
principles or risk retaliation and isolation. SMOs focusing on intellectual
property might even offer expert opinion in judicial proceedings.
…respecting intellectual property rules in the ICT
ecosystem is key to creating the trusted environment
described in the Principles.
46 Toward a Single Global Digital Economy
These examples raise some of the hard cases any Internet governance system
will face. But hard cases lead to good practices, as opposed to bad law. In hard
cases, MSE governance can be the optimal way to build broad collective cooperation
in framing responses. Hard cases can exemplify why MSE governance is
preferable to more legalistic solutions, and certainly to indifference or inaction.
Conclusion
The challenges to creating a single global Internet are large and growing. Annual
ICT revenues now exceed $4 trillion and the ICT industry accounts for a high percentage
of new high-skilled jobs worldwide. Failure to address in a timely manner
the fundamental flaws that threaten to cripple and fragment the Internet’s growth
and its seamless nature are major issues that need to be addressed now.
The grand political battles in the United States and Europe over budget deficits
and economic issues, the existence of unsustainable trends across geopolitical
regions and the rapid spread of the Internet’s related technologies all heighten the
importance of the Aspen IDEA Project effort to promote policies among governments
to ensure a robust, global and seamless Internet. Ensuring that the voices of
NGOs and firms with distinctly different priorities are considered only makes the
task more difficult. For example, differences between Internet edge companies and
content firms over intellectual property and the free flow of information entered
often into the discussions, making compromise on key policies and approaches
difficult to resolve. The time was not yet ripe for agreement.
The Principles, recommendations and implementation efforts of the Aspen
IDEA Project may never be embraced in full or by all relevant stakeholders.
Indeed, time and new technological change will make some of the details outdated
before they can be discussed, negotiated and agreed upon. Still, the Aspen IDEA
participants, who gave so generously of their knowledge and time, have enabled
the Aspen IDEA Project to offer a valuable start towards what is needed. The ideas
of IDEA set forth in this report are intended as a valuable stepping stone to a successful
Internet future.