NETmundial pathway
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Guenther Cyranek
Region: Brazil and Germany
Organization: Institut for Communication Research
Sector: Academia
Keywords: participation, open process, knowledge societies,
pluridisciplinary approach, cyber-ethics
Abstract
NETmundial is in demand for a holistic and pluridisciplinary approach to address the
growing complexity of the ecosystem Internet and its governance. It is relevant to
underline the interdependence of the normative, technical, and social components of this
open ecosystem and the inseparability between issues of access, content and expression.
Document
NETmundial pathway
Institute for Communication Research
Dr. Günther Cyranek, Director Office LAC, Florianópolis, Brazil
Dr. Dieter Klumpp, Director, Stuttgart, Germany
instkomm.de
Following the definition by UNESCO, Internet governance is understood as “the
complementary development and application by governments, the private sector, civil
society and the technical community, in their respective roles, of shared principles, norms,
rules, decision-making procedures, and activities that shape the evolution and use of the
Internet” (UNESCO 2012b).
We understand Internet in strengthening democratic and democratizing societies by
developing the Internet and its services with other area of public policy. This must be
assured by promoting an open, transparent and inclusive approach to Internet
Governance based on the principle of openness, encompassing the freedom of
expression, respect for privacy, universal access and technical interoperability, including
Ethics and the respect for cultural and linguistic diversity in cyberspace (see UNESCO
2014).
The international partners and members of instkomm.de request NETmundial to express
its support for the proposals made during the Bali Internet Governance Forum (IGF 2013)
and the Multi-stakeholder Advisory Group (MAG) to UN Secretary General: (1) With
regard to surveillance and monitoring activities through the Internet, there is need for
better protection for all citizens' privacy and security on line by balancing actions between
national interests and respect for internationally recognized human rights; (2)
representatives from several governments emphasized the importance of finding common
ground amongst all stakeholders of certain cyber-ethics that place value on respecting
local cultures on line while safeguarding users from emerging cyber threats; (3) the
importance of strengthening and maintaining the multistakeholder spirit and mechanism in
the Internet governance.
Following the view of UNESCO, there is need for a holistic and pluridisciplinary approach
to address the growing complexity of the ecosystem Internet and its governance. We
highlight the interdependence of the normative, technical, social components of this open
ecosystem and the inseparability between issues of access, content and expression.
Mechanisms have to be put in place to communicate “Internet Universality” based upon
the strength and interdependence of : “(i) the norm that the Internet Use is Human Rights
based, (ii) the norm that it is non-discrimatory“Open”, (iii) the norm that highlights
“Accessible to All”, and (iv) the norm that it is nurtured by Multi-stakeholder Participation”
(UNESCO 2013).
Internet Universality is a precondition to construct information and knowledge societies
(UNESCO 2012a), combined with open access to information, ICT in education,
information and media literacy in combination with Openness in content and technology
including Open Access to Scientific Information, Open Educational Resources, Free and
Open Source Software and Open Distance Learning.
Having present intercultural diversities we nevertheless claim all the best worldwide effort
to shaping the global internet usage for all mankind, thus avoiding national or even
regional restrictions and thresholds. We support the encouraging and funding of
indispensable professional governmental and non-governmental organizations,
institutions and associations.
References
IGF 2013
Internet Governance Forum. Bali, Indonesia 2013. http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/2013-
bali
UNESCO 2012a
UNESCO: Building Knowledge Societies. Paris 2012
http://en.unesco.org/themes/building-knowledge-societies#sthash.RzlIanBG.dpuf
UNESCO 2012b
UNESCO: Internet Governance. Paris 2012.
http://en.unesco.org/themes/internet-governance
UNESCO 2013
Internet Universality: A Means Towards Building Knowledge Societies and the Post-2015
Sustainable Development Agenda. Paris 2013
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/news/internet_universality_02.pdf