EUROPEAN COMMISSION
Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
NETMUNDIAL (SAO PAULO, 23-24 APRIL 2014)
INPUT ON "INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES"
(This contribution is based on the Communication of the European Commission "Internet Policy and
Governance - Europe's role in Shaping the Future of the Internet", COM(2014) 72/4, as well as a number of
discussions and positions on Internet governance, including inter alia the OECD Principles on Internet
Policy-making, and the G8 Deauville Declaration. This contribution is the sole responsibility of the
European Commission)
In preparation of the forthcoming Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of
Internet Governance ("NETmundial") which will take place in Sao Paulo (Brazil) on
23-24 April 2014, this is one of two contributions of the European Commission to the
open call for contributions.
The first topic of the call for contributions is "Internet Governance Principles":
"The NETmundial meeting aims to identify a set of universal principles to be promoted as
a global inspiration for the evolution of the Internet worldwide. Those principles should
be viewed from the perspective of the Internet as a platform for social, economic and
human development and a catalyzer to exercise human rights of all people of the world."
Following the conclusions of the 2002-2005 World Summit on the Information Society
(WSIS),1 a number of organisations and groups came forward with various statements of
principles applying to substantive and/or procedural elements of Internet policies and
governance. In most cases, each of these statements was supported by a limited set of
stakeholders, or limited in geographical scope.2
The Commission is of the view that a process leading towards a more broadly supported
and coherent set of principles for Internet governance would be helpful in finding
common ground at the global level.
Such a coherent set of principles should serve as an agreed, high-level guidance to
identify the priorities, constraints and objectives of policy and operational activities
related to the future of the Internet and of its governance. Accordingly, such principles
should feed into the concrete roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet
governance ecosystem, both from a procedural / institutional and from a substantive point
1 See http://www.itu.int/wsis.
2 Examples include the OECD Principles on Internet Policy-Making and the 2011 G8 Deauville
Declaration. The organisers of NETmundial have helpfully collected a broad range of Internet
governance principles at http://content.netmundial.br/internet-governance-principles/. An analysis of a
broad number of Internet principles, mostly related to "Internet freedom", is available at
http://bestbits.net/issue-comparison-of-major-declarations-on-internet-freedom/.
2
of view. The Commission is providing its views on the possible elements of a roadmap
separately.
For over two years, the Commission has advocated an approach summarised by the
COMPACT acronym:3 the Internet as a space of Civic responsibilities, One
unfragmented resource governed via a Multistakeholder approach to Promote democracy
and Human Rights, based on a sound technological Architecture that engenders
Confidence and facilitates a Transparent governance both of the underlying Internet
infrastructure and of the services which run on top of it.
More concretely, the Internet COMPACT is based on the following core beliefs:
1. The Internet is an ecosystem in which every participant must take up its
social responsibilities. Having due regard to applicable legislation concerning
the responsibilities of Internet intermediaries, in order to ensure the sustainability
of the Internet from both a technological and a societal point of view it is
necessary for the global community to work together towards a common
understanding both of corporate social responsibility across the whole Internet
value-chain and of the appropriate approaches to self- and co-regulation on the
Internet, as a complement to regulation – which should always remain as an
option but be used carefully and mindful of possible negative effects on
innovation. In any case, it is essential to ensure that fundamental rights are duly
respected and enforced.
2. The Internet should remain one single unfragmented space, where all
resources should be accessible in the same manner, irrespective of the
location of the user and the provider. Even when faced with complex
regulatory or political challenges, filtering traffic at borders or other purely
national approaches can lead to fragmentation of the Internet and could
compromise economic growth and the free flow of information. This does not
exclude increased efforts towards diversification of the underlying infrastructure
such as local internet exchange points and transmission capacity, which can
strengthen the resilience and robustness of the Internet, as well as measures
necessary to protect fundamental rights and to address concerns raised by
revelations of large-scale surveillance and intelligence activities.
3. Internet-related discussions and decisions should be based on a strengthened,
genuine multi-stakeholder model. This implies that the necessary intergovernmental
discussions are anchored in a multistakeholder context in the full
understanding that the Internet is built and maintained by a variety of
stakeholders, as well as governments. Furthermore, all decisions should be taken
on the basis of principles of good governance, including transparency,
accountability, and inclusiveness of all relevant stakeholders. Appropriate efforts
should be made in order to counter the significant differences in the ability to
participate across the various stakeholder groups to better ensure
representativeness. Furthermore, it should be recognised that different stages of
decision making processes each have their own requirements and may involve
different sets of stakeholders. A sustainable model needs to clearly define the
roles of actors in the governance process, including the role of public authorities
to fulfil their public policy responsibilities consistent with human rights online.
For the sake of clarity, this does not necessarily imply that the role of public
3 First presented at the occasion of the OECD's High-Level Meeting on the Internet Economy,
28.06.2011, http://ec.europa.eu/commission_2010-2014/kroes/en/blog/i-propose-a-compact-for-theinternet.
3
authorities should be strengthened; on the contrary, it is quite possible that in
certain well-defined cases the role of public authorities should be limited.
4. The Internet should be a space subject to the same laws and norms that
apply in other areas of our day-to-day lives; and where individuals can
benefit from their rights, and from judicial remedies when those rights are
infringed. An open and free Internet in which all rights and freedoms that people
have offline also apply online facilitates social and democratic progress
worldwide. Some states, quoting security concerns, attempt to curb global
connectivity of their citizens by censorship and other restrictions. This is not
acceptable. Blocking, slowing down or discrimination of content, applications
and services goes against the open nature of the Internet4.
5. The technical architecture of the Internet should be able to evolve to cope
with new and often unforeseen challenges. This ability, which is based inter
alia on the open and distributed nature of the Internet, based on non-proprietary
standards which create low barriers of entry, should be preserved. At the same
time, research, innovation and experimentation, both in the core and at the edges
of the Internet, should be promoted. Furthermore, Technical details of Internet
protocols and other information technology specifications can have significant
public policy implications. Their design can impact on human rights such as
users' data protection rights and security, their ability to access diverse knowledge
and information, and their freedom of expression online. It also affects other
stakeholders, including companies conducting business online. An effective
multistakeholder approach to specification setting on the internet will be based on
efficient mutual interactions between technical and public policy considerations5
so that technical specifications more systematically take into account public
policy concerns. This is particularly important when legal rights of individuals,
especially their human rights, are clearly impacted.
6. Confidence in the Internet and its governance is a prerequisite for the
realisation of the Internet's potential as an engine for economic growth and
innovation. A rising number of activities online directly contravene the exercise
of fundamental rights. Cybercrime, including online child abuse, identity theft,
cyber-attacks and non-cash payment fraud, and other forms of unlawful
processing of personal data pose a serious threat to confidence in the use of the
Internet. Large-scale surveillance and intelligence activities have also led to a loss
of confidence in the Internet and its present governance arrangements. All these
challenges need to be addressed urgently, with the full involvement of all
stakeholders. The role of the technical community is crucial, including by
ensuring confidence in IP based communications and the resilience of
cryptosystems to increase the trustworthiness of IP-based communications. This
would support an effective fight against cyber-crime and ensure the privacy of
users.
7. Transparent, inclusive, balanced and accountable governance of the Internet
(concerning both its infrastructure and the activities which take place on top
of it) is paramount for the sustainability of the Internet as a single,
4 COM(2013)627. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down
measures concerning the European single market for electronic communications and to achieve a
connected continent.
5 See Regulation 1025/2012 of 25.10.2012 on European standardisation, Commission Decision of
28.11.2011 setting up the European Multistakeholder platform on ICT standardisation, see
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/european-multistakeholder-platform-ict-standardisation
4
unfragmented resource. Sound multistakeholder processes remain essential for
the future governance of the Internet. However, the fact that a process is claimed
to be "multi-stakeholder" does not per se guarantee outcomes that are widely seen
to be legitimate. Multistakeholder processes in relation to Internet policies must
fulfil, beyond their consistency with fundamental rights, at least the following
requirements: (a) transparency; (b) inclusiveness and balance; (c) accountability.
Furthermore, the ability of public authorities that derive their powers and
legitimacy from democratic processes to fulfil their public policy responsibilities
- where those are compatible with universal human rights - should be ensured.
This includes their right to intervene with regulation where required.
The Commission sees the Internet COMPACT as the guiding principles that will guide
its efforts towards an Internet that should remain a single, open, free, unfragmented
network of networks, subject to the same laws and norms that apply in other areas of our
day-to-day lives. Its governance should be based on an inclusive, transparent and
accountable multistakeholder model of governance, without prejudice to any regulatory
intervention that may be taken in view of identified public interest objectives such as to
ensure the respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and democratic values as
well as linguistic and cultural diversity and care for vulnerable persons. A safe,
secure, sound and resilient architecture is the basis for trust and confidence of
Internet users. At the same time, the innovation power of the Internet must be
maintained. This requires careful yet robust stewardship.