ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE
INTERNET GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Andrea Glorioso
Region: Europe
Organization: European Commission
Sector: Government
Keywords: europe comission, roadmap internet governance
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
"There is a broad view about the need to continue evolving the Multistakeholder
InternetGovernance Ecosystem. The goals are to energize discussion and to achieve
greaterconsensus of the community including a broader range of stakeholders to
providepossible means for developing solutions to specific problems faced
bygovernments/stakeholders. There are several ongoing initiatives trying to contribute
withthat objective. The meeting and related discussions will be an important milestone
tosupport the developing multistakeholder consensus on important governance issues.
Itcould serve as valuable inputs to other forums, seek for more clarification and
pursueagreements for the way forward."
Document
In preparation of the forthcoming Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of
Internet Governance ("NETmundial") which will take place in Sao Paulo (Brazil) on 23-24
April 2014, this is the second of two contributions of the European Commission in
response to the open call for contributions.
The second topic of the call for contributions is "Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the
Internet Governance Ecosystem":
"There is a broad view about the need to continue evolving the Multistakeholder Internet
Governance Ecosystem. The goals are to energize discussion and to achieve greater
consensus of the community including a broader range of stakeholders to provide
possible means for developing solutions to specific problems faced by
governments/stakeholders. There are several ongoing initiatives trying to contribute with
that objective. The meeting and related discussions will be an important milestone to
support the developing multistakeholder consensus on important governance issues. It
could serve as valuable inputs to other forums, seek for more clarification and pursue
agreements for the way forward."
The working definition of "Internet governance",1 agreed as part of the conclusions of the
2002-2005 World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS),2 was carefully designed,
following extensive multi-stakeholder discussions within the ad hoc Working Group on
Internet Governance,3 as a dynamic concept that could be adapted to the evolving
challenges and opportunities of a growing Internet.
Indeed, a number of parallel discussions and conversations
o/Users/Toccos/Desktop/x.txtn the possible evolution and future of global Internet
governance frameworks are taking place throughout the world. Although such variety of
discussions can be beneficial in ensuring that a diversity of viewpoints can contribute to
the reflection, there is a clear risk that a multiplicity of fora may lead to duplication of
efforts and, most importantly, to the exclusion and disenfranchisement of persons and
organisations with less resources. This is precisely the opposite of what should happen if
we want the future of the global Internet and of its governance to be seen as truly
legitimate.
Therefore, the European Commission welcomes the objective of NETmundial to act as a
catalyser in finding commonalities and a shared understanding of the most important
steps in front of us. The most useful result of the NETmundial meeting would be for the
Internet community to clearly identify risks and opportunities as well as work-streams,
relevant actors and corresponding mandates for action. NETmundial should be seen as
an essential milestone in the context of the several discussions and processes that are
taking place, including within the UN Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation, the
WSIS+10 review, the Internet Governance Forum process and the 2014 ITU
Plenipotentiary conference. In this spirit, the
In this spirit, the European Commission would like to offer a number of concrete and
operational suggestions towards a shared roadmap for the evolution of the Internet
governance ecosystem. These concrete suggestions are based on the core principles that
guide the activities of the Commission when it comes to Internet – the Internet
COMPACT, which has been outlined in the separate submission on "Internet principles":
1. In order to further strengthen the multi-stakeholder model, operational guidelines
should be developed, based on an exchange of best practice, in order to ensure that multistakeholder
processes in relation to Internet policies fulfil – beyond their consistency with
fundamental rights – at least the following requirements:
a. Transparency. All stakeholders must have meaningful access to and information on
the organisational processes and procedures under which the body operates. This should
prevent in particular any proxy activity for silent stakeholders.
b. Inclusiveness and Balance. Those responsible for an inclusive process must make a
reasonable effort to reach out to all parties impacted by a given topic, and offer fair and
affordable opportunities to participate and contribute to all key stages of decision making,
while avoiding capture of the process by any dominant stakeholder or vested interests.
c. Accountability. There should be clear, public commitments to give regular account to
its stakeholders or independent supervisory bodies, and to allow any party to seek
redress through effective dispute resolution mechanisms.
Appropriate leeway should be left to each relevant organisation, process or forum to
identify the most suitable way to decline the general approach to their specific challenges
and constraints, in a spirit of subsidiarity.4
As part of this reflection, it is essential to come to a shared understanding and clear
definition on the roles of actors in the governance process, including the role of public
authorities to fulfil their public policy responsibilities consistent with human rights online.
The European Commission is ready to work with other stakeholders in order to develop
such guidelines.
2. Stronger interactions between stakeholders involved in Internet governance should be
fostered via issue-based dialogues, instead of through new bodies. This would allow
relevant stakeholders to address specific challenges across structural and organisational
boundaries. Often, similar discussions on Internetrelated policies take place across these
different organisations, with a considerable overlap of people and topics. This leads both
to a "silo" mentality and to a "discussion fatigue". In addition, this tends to exclude people
and groups which do not have the necessary resources (in terms of time, knowledge,
funding) to follow all of them.
A different "cross-cutting" approach, through which the focus is on the specific topic of
discussion (e.g. privacy, security, consumer protection, human rights) rather than on the
organisation / forum which is assumed to be the "right" place to hold that discussion,
should be sought. Appropriate supporting tools should be developed, allowing interested
parties to be involved on specific topics discussed in multiple fora at the same time.
The European Commission is launching the technical development of the Global Internet
Policy Observatory (GIPO) in 2014 as one such tool and as a resource for the global
community;5 the Commission further welcomes the cooperation of all interested parties in
this initiative.
3. The Internet has become a key infrastructure with global dimensions. It works well
without structural oversight by international intergovernmental bodies. At the same time,
greater international balance within the existing structures can increase the legitimacy of
current governance arrangements. Accordingly, concrete and actionable steps, including
a clear timeline, should be identified in order to:
a. Globalise the IANA functions, whilst safeguarding the continued stability and security
of the domain name system.
b. Globalise ICANN, including its Affirmation of Commitments.
In carrying this out, the continued stability and security of the Domain Name System shall
be safeguarded.
The European Commission is optimistic, given the positive signals from leading national
actors, that a shared vision to achieve the above goals can be validated at the
NETmundial meeting. The Commission believes that although all stakeholders, including
governments and public authorities, should contribute to the debate in all relevant fora,
the natural place to take these action forward from an operational point of view would be
ICANN itself and the communities working within and with ICANN.
4. Mutually respectful dialogues between all stakeholders on the future development of
global Internet governance are essential given the global economic and societal
importance of the Internet. The Internet Governance Forum (IGF) has emerged from the
World Summit on Information Society (WSIS) to facilitate forward-looking discussions
amongst all stakeholders, many of whom had not cooperated closely before. It is
important, however, to improve the quality and format of IGF outcomes to enhance its
impact on global Internet governance and policy. The European Commission is confident
that a strengthened IGF will progressively become an important driver of successful
Internet governance; however, these necessary improvements should not be a reason to
delay other urgently needed activities.
Accordingly, the IGF should be strengthened, taking account of the Recommendations of
the Working Group on Improvements to the IGF.6 The Commission is already a key
financial contributor to the IGF Secretariat and to the general activities of the IGF, and
stands ready to cooperate with all other stakeholders to strengthen the IGF along the
above-mentioned lines.
5. Technical details of Internet protocols and other information technology specifications
can have significant public policy implications. Even where the technical discussion
process is open, key decisions are frequently made by technical experts in the absence of
broad stakeholder representation. An effective multistakeholder approach to specification
setting on the internet will be based on efficient mutual interactions between technical and
public policy considerations7 so that technical specifications more systematically take into
account public policy concerns. This is particularly important when legal rights of
individuals, especially their human rights, are clearly impacted. The implications of this
evolution in norm setting in relation to the Internet require an open public debate with all
concerned.
The Commission proposes to convene, together with interested parties, a series of
workshops with international experts in law, ethics8, social sciences, economics,
international relations and technology, in order to develop concrete and actionable
recommendations to ensure coherence between existing normative frameworks and new
forms of Internet-enabled norm-setting.
Furthermore, all stakeholders should strengthen (and where appropriate create)
structured mechanisms to allow regular, early and truly inclusive upstream participation,
review and comment in technical decisions. These structured mechanisms should also
strive towards consistency of technical decisions with human rights. The Commission
stands ready to discuss with relevant stakeholders the best options to achieve this
objective.
6. Like other cross-border activities, the Internet poses a series of challenges for the
application of laws. While such challenges are not always specific to the Internet, the
sheer quantity of cross-border transactions of various types which take place online, call
for a more thorough reflection on how existing rules apply on the Internet. Furthermore,
many activities on the Internet are increasingly governed by contractual arrangements
between private companies and users on the Internet. Non-contractual obligations of ecommerce
traders and intermediaries are also relevant in this context. The complexity
and, in some cases, the opaqueness of these arrangements, including for what concerns
provisions on applicable jurisdiction and law, may give rise to a certain degree of legal
uncertainty.
The European Commission plans to launch an in-depth review of the risks, at
international level, of conflicts of laws and jurisdictions arising on the Internet and
assess all mechanisms, processes and tools available and necessary to solve such
conflicts. Cooperation with existing or planned initiatives would help identifying
globally shared solutions in the mid- to longterm.
The Commission sees the above steps as key elements of a concrete roadmap for the
evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem. For the European Commission, the end
goal is an Internet that should remain a single, open, free, unfragmented network of
networks, subject to the same laws and norms that apply in other areas of our day-to-day
lives. Its governance should be based on an inclusive, transparent and accountable
multistakeholder model of governance, without prejudice to any regulatory intervention
that may be taken in view of identified public interest objectives such as to ensure the
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and democratic values as well as
linguistic and cultural diversity and care for vulnerable persons. A safe, secure,
sound and resilient architecture is the basis for trust and confidence of Internet users. At
the same time, the innovation power of the Internet must be maintained. This requires
careful yet robust stewardship.