Document

Ten Principles of the Web

The Internet is a set of equipment, means of transmission, protocols, computer programs, data and information that, connected to each other, establishes a big net on planetary scale. But the magic that fascinates us all is known as the Web, a set of services allowing to open documents located anywhere in the globe, and through hyperlinks, to navigate around pages with a wide range of content – videos, images, effects – and interact in social networks. So, we can define the web as a mean to: expose, reference and link. All in digital network.

The Web also takes the risk of becoming a zone of disputes, closing corporate and proprietary services, invasion of privacy. This W3C Brasil contribution, the “Ten Principles of the Web”, is an invitation to reflection, so we can reach consensus around principles and guidelines in order to keep the Web as an open and universal platform. The Web for all requires a debate from all parties involved. 

WEB FOR ALL.

The main value of the Web is the social value. The Web is more than a technological environment: is an environment of human communication, business transactions and opportunities to share knowledge. These Web contents should be available to everyone, regardless of hardware, software, network infrastructure, culture, geographical location, physical or mental skills, socioeconomic status or education level of each individual. 

WEB IN EVERYTHING.

The number of devices able to access the Web grows steadily. This is not the environment suited to desktop computers anymore. We can navigate via cell phones, digital TVs, cars and even through home appliances. This comprehensiveness requires the Web content to provide the possibility of being accessed from any of these devices, including remotely or while in motion.

WEB ORGANIZED BY STANDARDS.

Standardization means create a universal environment, where everyone could know what to do, how to do it, and where they could be able to do it. That´s why the standards should be opened, internationally accepted and discussed in organizations that could host all those interested in developing the Web, assuring the independence of providers and proprietary technologies. Standardized and publicly documented specifications are critical for the freedom of publishing Web content and to provide the continuous and steady keeping of those contents.

ACCESSIBLE WEB.

Ensure persons with visual, hearing, mobility and mental impairments, or any other disabilities, the conditions to understand, navigate, interact and develop themselves in the Web environment, are a prerequisite for the Web to evolve into a universal, inclusive design. Inclusion must also reach the new generations and the elderly, taking into account the required education to generate new digital competences.   

RELIABLE WEB.

More than transform the way we communicate, the Web changed the nature of our social relations. The Web is an environment with new meeting places. Business transactions and personal relationships often take place without personal meetings. The confidence in the Web is directly related to the full right of freedom of speech, research and navigation, by adopting new technological standards and models that assure the users privacy and safety.  

WEB WITH MULTIPLE AUTHORS AND READERS.

The Web is more than a reading and researching environment. As a communication tool, it allows everyone, at any time, and from anywhere, to share knowledge. Provide Web contents isn´t a one-way action anymore. Nowadays, Web publishing is the meeting point where the hyperlinks with multiple authors interact. Keep this architecture and adopt universal standards are also a guarantee of the Web´s diversity.

WEB TO SERVE DEMOCRACY.

The Web went beyond the stage of a gigantic document collection. Nowadays, it is a set of referenced services and data reused and combined in many applications for different purposes. The access to open data, especially public government data, enables the interaction between citizens and community, and between community and government, in its many spheres and instances. Ensure the free development of applications on Web based on open data is, nowadays, one of the pillars of a democratic society. 

WEB FOR SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.

The wide use of the Web with e-commerce and e-government best practices fosters the local economic development. Extend those benefits to the different social layers, particularly those in need or in remote places, through digital inclusion policies and the use of mobile technology resources, will provide solutions that will increase the access to public health, education and assistance services. 

WEB THAT PRESERVES ITS MEMORY.

Defining strategies and policies to select contents in order to preserve the Web´s memory, the biggest information repository created by the human kind, will enable the future generations to access the culture depicted on the Web, and will make it feasible as a subject of study and research, plus contributing to the Web´s evolution.  Resources must be dedicated to the preservation of the Brazilian Web and its memory, in all aspects of its culture. 

WEB OF ALL.

The universality and diversity of the Web must be sustained and deepened through the governance of the Brazilian Internet, carried out based on a democratic, transparent and pluralistic model, where the participation of different sectors of our society is ensured.  A governance that is also guided by the principles of collaboration, collective creation, ethics and human rights. 

Take part! Create your own hyperlinks! Link to the open and universal Web: www.w3c.br/decalogue