ICC BASIS Submission on Internet Governance Principles
and Roadmap for the further Evolution of the Internet
Governance Ecosystem
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Christopher Boam
Region: France
Organization: ICC BASIS
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Internet, governance, BASIS, digital, development
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Members of the International Chamber of Commerce?s (ICC) initiative Business Action to
Support the Information Society (BASIS) are pleased to contribute Global Internet
Governance Principles and considerations for a Roadmap for the further Evolution of the
Internet Governance Ecosystem as input into the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the
Future of Internet Governance, to be held 23 - 24 April 2014 in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Business focuses in this submission on a) five principles that are deemed most relevant
for businesses worldwide: 1) a secure, open and interoperable network, 2) cross-border
flow of data and information, 3) improving access, 4) supporting the rule of law, 5)
protecting the application of rights, and 5) the continuation of the multistakeholder
governance model, as well as on b) considerations for a roadmap for the further evolution
of the Internet governance ecosystem.
Document
Section 1:
Internet Governance Principles
Members of the International Chamber of Commerce’s (ICC) initiative Business
Action to Support the Information Society (BASIS) are pleased to contribute these
Global Internet Governance Principles as input into the Global Multistakeholder
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance, to be held 23 - 24 April 2014 in Sao
Paulo, Brazil. Business focuses in this submission on five principles that are
deemed most relevant for businesses worldwide: 1) a secure, open and
interoperable network, 2) cross-border flow of data and information, 3) improving
access, 4) supporting the rule of law, 5) protecting the application of rights, and 5)
the continuation of the multistakeholder governance model.
Members of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and its initiative Business
Action to Support the Information Society (BASIS) are pleased to contribute these Global
Internet Governance Principles as input into the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the
Future of Internet Governance, to be held 23 - 24 April 2014 in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
The multistakeholder model approach to Internet governance has created decentralized
structures that govern the Internet, which in turn has fostered unprecedented economic,
social, and political development. The Internet has enabled individuals to access
information and services, to connect and to communicate, and to share ideas and
knowledge globally. It has become a powerful engine for technological innovation,
economic growth and the preservation and promotion of cultural diversity.
Members of ICC BASIS depend on a thriving Internet to do business in a variety of
industry sectors and markets, throughout the world. In particular, we rely upon on a safe,
secure, open, interoperable, and sustainable Internet in order to stay connected with
customers, business associates and end users. And we believe that the multistakeholder
model, as continually strengthened and evolved, will serve our shared interest in a stable
and sustainable Internet. Indeed, it is precisely because of this multistakeholder
governance model that the Internet has grown into the platform for economic growth that it
is today.
As we look toward the future, we see the following principles as vital to the success of any
future model of Internet governance.
Functionality, security, stability and resiliency of the network: Policies must ensure
a safe, secure, open, interoperable, resilient, seamless and sustainable Internet.
Cross-border flow of data and information: Business stresses the need and
importance of cross-border data flows to the functioning of the digital economy and
continued achievement of the Information Society. While we recognize the need to
comply with local laws, including those on privacy and security, they should be consistent
with established trade rules.
Improving and expanding access to the Internet: Policies should stimulate sustainable
investment and deployment of Internet networks and industries, and services that create
demand for those networks. In particular, policies and regulatory frameworks should
support innovation, investment, and competition, including the protection of intellectual
property. Standards should be designed to facilitate interoperability. Efforts to foster local
content, improve cultural and linguistic diversity, and bring access to all global citizens,
particularly to those in developing countries, should be supported.
Rule of law: Policies should support the rule of law, which governments have primary
responsibility for advancing.
Application of rights: Offline rights should apply online, especially with respect to
freedom of expression and human rights.
Making decisions in open consultation with all stakeholders: Any discussion about
Internet governance principles, frameworks or processes, should be conducted in a
multistakeholder format. All stakeholders should be appropriately represented in a
transparent and accountable decision-making process.
Business Action to Support the Information Society (BASIS)
ICC created BASIS to raise awareness among the public, governments, civil society,
intergovernmental organizations and technical community of what business requires to
continue contributing to the development of the Information Society. It serves as the voice
of business in the global dialogue on the Information Society, following two World
Summits on the Information Society (WSIS) held in Geneva (2003) and Tunis (2005).
To promote the environment in which business around the world will continue to thrive as
an innovator of information and communication technologies, BASIS participates in UNlinked
forums set up to continue the dialogue, such as the Internet Governance Forum
(IGF) and the WSIS follow up and implementation processes, particularly through the UN
Commission on Science and Technology for Development.
To help shape the agenda and participate in these global discussions, BASIS relies on the
policies developed in ICC’s Commission on the Digital Economy as the foundation for its
efforts.
BASIS builds on the activities and network of the Coordinating Committee of Business
Interlocutors (CCBI), which ICC formed to coordinate participation by world business in
the processes leading up to, and at WSIS.
BASIS members include business organizations such as the Africa Information &
Communication Technologies Alliance (AfICTA), the Computer Society of India, and the
World Information Technology and Services Alliance (WITSA) as well as several ICC
national committees and companies from across sectors and geographies.
BASIS is an initiative of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), an organization
composed of hundreds of thousands of member companies and associations from over
120 countries.
For further information regarding BASIS, the partners, members and activities, visit:
www.iccwbo.org/basis
*** *** ***
Section 2:
Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
Members of the International Chamber of Commerce’s (ICC) initiative Business
Action to Support the Information Society (BASIS) are pleased to contribute these
considerations for a roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet governance
ecosystem as input into the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of
Internet Governance, to be held 23 - 24 April 2014 in Sao Paolo, Brazil.
Members of the International Chamber of Commerce’s (ICC) Business Action to Support
the Information Society (BASIS) initiative are pleased to contribute these considerations
for a roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem as input into
the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance, to be held 23 -
24 April 2014 in Sao Paolo, Brazil.
Business welcomes the opportunity to underscore the strength of existing
mechanisms and the multi-stakeholder processes of Internet governance
In view of the increased relevance of the Internet to our society and economy, business
supports the opportunity to examine the existing mechanisms of Internet governance, so
that the stakeholder groups can identify areas of improvement of these mechanisms.
The strength of the current distributed, bottom-up Internet governance process is not only
in its open and inclusive participation model, and the legitimacy and credibility that model
fosters, but also its flexibility to rapidly adapt to changing technologies and issues. For
example, local and regional IGF processes are an effective way to expand participation in
Internet governance debate and create a healthy exchange of ideas at the grassroots
level, while also feeding into the global IGF. The NetMundial meeting in Brazil can
contribute to the positive elements of enhanced cooperation and appropriate, meaningful
multistakeholder participation and inclusion through both the principles and the road map.
The existing multi-stakeholder environment is rich with opportunities to address
governance issues and to vet the perceived need for further mechanisms or
processes
Business favours using existing organizations, institutions and processes for any Internet
governance framework discussion.
Some governments have highlighted a concern about certain Internet-related policy or
technical issues for which they cannot identify relevant existing mechanisms to address
their perceived problems. We feel it is important to note that business, in contributing to
the CSTD Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation’s (WGEC) current mapping exercise,
identified more than 40 international venues, organizations, and private sector, technical
community, and civil society initiatives that have been established to address a broad
range of Internet public policy and technical issues.
The upcoming launch of the European Commission’s Global Internet Policy Observatory
(GIPO) will provide another valuable online resource on Internet policy, regulations and
technology, and better enable emerging economies in particular to engage on Internet
governance and policy matters.
The Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance serves as an
opportunity to review and build on existing work and develop a good process for: (1)
identifying issues that do not appear to addressed yet, (2) exchanging information on
solution mechanisms already available to address these issues, or (3) considering
whether new mechanisms need to be developed.
There is a risk that establishing new mechanisms or models, without a thorough and
methodical assessment could drain resources and result in reduced participation by all
stakeholders in existing efforts. Business seeks to avoid the development of new
mechanisms that duplicate existing efforts and supports efforts to strengthen and expand
existing mechanisms to address outstanding issues, to ensure that the Internet remains a
vibrant platform for economic growth and innovation.
The evolution and improvement of Governance Mechanisms
The evolution of Internet governance principles, frameworks and accountability
mechanisms is a process that must proceed through careful work and analysis. It is
important to better understand the various alternative options for further progress. It is
important to ensure that any changes would contribute to enhancing the security, stability,
privacy, resiliency, and interoperability of the global Internet, while also ensuring the rule
of law and economical and societal benefits.
Business is interested in pursuing a credible and productive discussion and examination
of possible improvements to existing governance mechanisms, including issues related to
globalization. There are many concerns that have been raised related to the need for
greater globalization of Internet Governance mechanisms. Despite the many years where
people have been discussing this issue the topic still means different things to different
people. Among the issues: the need for greater geographic diversity, which might mean a
need for greater inclusion, participation, transparency or oversight; applicable law and
jurisdiction, contractual obligations and various elements of technical mechanisms. One of
the main purposes served by these governance mechanisms is the continued stability,
functionality and interoperability of the unique and global Internet. Any improvements to
Internet governance mechanisms must at a minimum assure that continued stability,
functionality and interoperability, while providing a continued evolutionary process
improvement, diminished threat of harm or other enhanced governance outcomes.
For instance, any adjustments to the current structure of the IANA contract must be
considered and conducted in a deliberate and cautious manner, to ensure that no
incremental risk or instability is introduced into IANA’s functions, including the root zone
management process and must recognize and respect other existing agreements related
to the IANA functions. The goal in all facets of Internet governance is to ensure
consumer and user trust in the Internet as a means of speech, creativity, innovation and
legitimate commerce.
Business stresses the need to proceed methodically and carefully with any proposed
change, so as to not impose unintended consequences and risks. In this regard, any
transition process for IANA and its functions must begin with a clear understanding of
what “globalization” should mean. The global stakeholder community would need to be
fully engaged not only in developing milestones and timelines for the “globalization” of
these critical functions, but also to ensuring the reliability and accountability of any such
plan to the security and stability of the global Internet.
We welcome an opportunity to review the process by which potential issues are
identified and addressed by mechanisms in the multistakeholder environment
Business is examining how global stakeholders should pursue a voluntary, transparent,
inclusive and methodical process for considering mechanisms to addressed perceived
governance or operational problems. This process should include the following elements:
1. A potential issue should be first identified to the global stakeholder community,
indicating what the implications of the issue are to governance and to determine whether
the issue has already been addressed in an existing mechanism or identify the
appropriate mechanism to address the issue.
2. Once the issue has been assessed, any proposed solution should then be fully
described to the global stakeholder community.
3. The proposed solution should then be analysed to determine whether it would
violate the principle of “first, do no harm” to the functionality, stability and interoperability
of the unique and global Internet.
4. Finally, the solution should then be thoroughly evaluated to determine its potential
effectiveness to address the problem as well as the potential for possible unintended
consequences or burdens.
Another concern for business in any Internet governance discussion is to counter the
growing trend of imposing new barriers to the growth of the Internet as a global platform
for economic and social development. In this context, business supports the development
of legal rules and policy frameworks that lead to certainty and to predictable outcomes
that will foster the continued development of the Internet as a global platform for
commerce, services and content.
Business Action to Support the Information Society (BASIS)
ICC created BASIS to raise awareness among the public, governments, civil society,
intergovernmental organizations and technical community of what business requires to
continue contributing to the development of the Information Society. It serves as the voice
of business in the global dialogue on the Information Society, following two World
Summits on the Information Society (WSIS) held in Geneva (2003) and Tunis (2005).
To promote the environment in which business around the world will continue to thrive as
an innovator of information and communication technologies, BASIS participates in UNlinked
forums set up to continue the dialogue, such as the Internet Governance Forum
(IGF) and the WSIS follow up and implementation processes, particularly through the UN
Commission on Science and Technology for Development.
To help shape the agenda and participate in these global discussions, BASIS relies on the
policies developed in ICC’s Commission on the Digital Economy as the foundation for its
efforts.
BASIS builds on the activities and network of the Coordinating Committee of Business
Interlocutors (CCBI), which ICC formed to coordinate participation by world business in
the processes leading up to, and at WSIS.
BASIS members include business organizations such as the Africa Information &
Communication Technologies Alliance (AfICTA), the Computer Society of India, and the
World Information Technology and Services Alliance (WITSA) as well as several ICC
national committees and companies from across sectors and geographies.
BASIS is an initiative of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), an organization
composed of hundreds of thousands of member companies and associations from over
120 countries.
For further information regarding BASIS, the partners, members and activities, visit:
www.iccwbo.org/basis