Document

 

The Tunis Agenda of the second World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) defined Internet governance as "the development and application by governments, the private sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, rules, decision-making procedures, and programmes that shape the evolution and use of the Internet."

 

 

 

Within this context, as supporters of the civil society, we are working on subjects related to the privacy and protection of personal data in the digital society.

 

 

 

In this regard, it is essential to emphasize the need to define principles and rules that are accepted by all actors in the information society for a good governance of the Internet.

 

 

 

Indeed, it is generally admitted that the Internet is a potentially necessary engine for the development of our world, a world we would like to be better, more united and more just. Today, the Internet has turned into a universal space for communication and exchange, an instrument for the promotion and defense of human rights. It is a tremendous space for freedom, in which all freedoms are present, mainly political, economic, social, academic, etc.

 

 

 

However, Internet can also be a medium for harmful acts and behaviors against the enjoyment of human rights. Privacy attacks are increasingly more frequent, particularly in regards to the abuse and disclosure of personal information.

 

 

 

All of this justifies, as stated above, the need to define principles and rules accepted by all actors for a good governance of the Internet.

 

 

 

Under the Internet governance principle definition process, we propose the principles listed below, which we consider are critical for an Internet where human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy and rule of law, are acknowledged and respected, towards a more free, united and just world.

 

 

 

1. Principle of Acknowledgment and Respect of All Fundamental Rights and Freedoms

 

The entire Internet community and each individual stakeholder, including the States, should commit to the acknowledgment and respect of all fundamental rights and freedoms, as part of the policies and activities carried out that are related to Internet.

 

 

 

States have the right and responsibility to define Internet public policies, both at a national and international level. To this end, they must ensure full compliance of this principle whilst committing themselves not to violate the fundamental freedoms acknowledged within the relevant United Nations documents.

 

 

 

2. Inclusive and Participatory Governance

 

In order to achieve a good Internet governance, all stakeholders should fully and accurately participate in the development of legal and institutional frameworks, both at a national and international level.

 

Stakeholders should then pledge to respect the transparency and responsibility principles in each of their activities, functions, and competitions.

 

 

 

3. “Digital Citizen” Participation

 

The principle of participation of digital citizens in the development of Internet governance public policies and mechanisms should be supported and respected by the States. “Digital citizens” must be able to exercise their fundamental rights and freedoms in an unhindered manner, except for those stipulated by law.

 

 

 

4. Internet Universality

 

The Internet universality principle should be acknowledged and respected by all actors.

 

 

 

5. Security Principle

 

In order to achieve a good Internet governance, the security principle means that all Internet actors and users can trust the integrity, security and confidentiality of communication systems; that they can trust their communications will not be hindered, intercepted or spied on.

 

 

 

6. Legal Principal

 

Any restriction to the use of Internet should be contemplated by the law. No State or private company should adopt or apply measures that infringe the right to the use of Internet in the absence of a legislative act, respectful of fundamental rights and freedoms, and compliant to the corresponding clarity and accuracy rules.

 

 

 

7. Cultural and Linguistic Diversity

 

The cultural diversity principle should be acknowledged and respected by everyone. This principle should support local content creation and promotion.