OECD Contribution to the Internet Governance Principles
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) provides a multi-stakeholder policy forum to maximise the benefits of information and communication technologies and the Internet as drivers of innovation, productivity, growth, sustainable development and social well-being.
The OECD has developed guidelines to assist governments in encouraging an open and unified Internet, thereby supporting the fundamental and increasing role it plays for economic and social development. In undertaking this work, the approach to standard setting has been one of multi-stakeholder consultation and openness. For over two decades, OECD work has covered domestic and cross-border legal and regulatory, technical and educational issues related to the Internet economy, including communication infrastructure and services, cybersecurity, critical information infrastructures, privacy and consumer protection.
In 2011, consistent with the growing recognition of the critical role played by the Internet, the OECD community came together, through a multi-stakeholder process, to draw on the experience of all participants in good practices for Internet governance. This led to the adoption of the OECD Recommendation on Internet Policy Making Principles. This work is of particular relevance for the discussions to take place in the NETmundial Conference in São Paulo, and through this submission, the OECD is pleased to offer these Principles as contribution to the Conference.
The Principles were endorsed by all 34 Member countries, along with Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt and Lithuania, aiming to maintain and enhance the open nature of the Internet. The goals include sharing policies and practices to attain the greatest practical coverage and use while protecting privacy, security, children online, intellectual property, and the free flow of information. The Principles, set out below, support a flexible, multi-stakeholder approach to Internet policy making and strengthened international co-operation.
OECD Contribution to the Internet Governance Principles
The Principles are:
1. Promote and protect the global free flow of information;
2. Promote the open, distributed and interconnected nature of the Internet;
3. Promote investment and competition in high speed networks and services;
4. Promote and enable the cross-border delivery of services;
5. Encourage multi-stakeholder co-operation in policy development processes;
6. Foster voluntarily developed codes of conduct;
7. Develop capacities to bring publicly available, reliable data into the policy-making process;
8. Ensure transparency, fair process, and accountability;
9. Strengthen consistency and effectiveness in privacy protection at a global level;
10. Maximise individual empowerment;
11. Promote creativity and innovation;
12. Limit Internet intermediary liability;
13. Encourage co-operation to promote Internet security;
14. Give appropriate priority to enforcement efforts.
The Internet has had profound and wide reaching affects on economies and societies around the world. It benefits individuals, businesses and governments through a large variety of digital goods and services. The OECD believes that the openness of the Internet and the multi-stakeholder framework have been key factors enabling society to reap the benefits of this platform by stimulating innovation and economic opportunities, as well as enabling people to give voice to democratic aspirations.
With this contribution and conscious of the fact that the current Internet Governance Model can be strengthened and improved, the OECD presents the Internet Policy-Making Principles listed above as a roadmap to advance the much-needed global dialogue. This contribution also maps below OECD guidance and relevant work that underpins the Principles.
The NETmundial meeting will provide an important platform to evolve towards shared principles for building a sound Internet ecosystem. In this regard, the OECD looks forward to continue its engagement in this important process.