The Internet Association?s Internet Governance Principles
Submission
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Hauwa Otori
Region: United States
Organization: The Internet Association
Sector: Other
Keywords:
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
The Internet Association, a trade association representing leading Internet companies,
appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on principles for Internet governance in
advance of the upcoming Global Multi-Stakeholder Meeting on the Future of the Internet
Governance. We welcome the Brazilian government, CGI.br, and /1net?s efforts in
convening all stakeholders to discuss the critical issue of Internet governance. Our
member companies understand the importance of preserving the Internet?s successful
multi-stakeholder model and rely on its open, bottom-up model to ensure that global
citizens are able to access and take advantage of this growing platform.
Document
The Internet Association’s Internet Governance Principles Submission
Global Multi-Stakeholder Meeting on the Future of the Internet Governance
April 23 - April 24, 2014 (São Paulo, Brazil)
The Internet Association, a trade association representing leading Internet companies[1]
, appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on principles for Internet governance in
advance of the upcoming Global Multi-Stakeholder Meeting on the Future of the Internet
Governance. We welcome the Brazilian government, CGI.br, and /1net’s efforts in
convening all stakeholders to discuss the critical issue of Internet governance. Our
member companies understand the importance of preserving the Internet’s successful
multi-stakeholder model and rely on its open, bottom-up model to ensure that global
citizens are able to access and take advantage of this growing platform.
With almost 3 billion users around the globe, the Internet is a transformative platform for
technological innovation, democratic discourse, and economic growth. According to a
March 2012 report by the Boston Consulting Group, small-and medium size businesses
(SMEs) - proven engines of economic growth - contribute significantly to the Internet
economy, which will grow to $4.2 trillion in G-20 economies.[2] SMEs have played an
essential role in the Web’s development as a mechanism for creating jobs and generating
revenue.[3] For instance, in Brazil, SMEs that rely heavily on the Internet take advantage
of the Web to engage consumers and drive increased sales.[4]
In addition to facilitating economic growth, the Internet’s important role as a forum for free
expression is undeniable. The International Telecommunication Union’s Secretary
General previously recognized in a draft report that the Internet alters the global economy
by creating opportunities in local communities and acting as a driver for social change.[5]
During the Tunisia and Egypt uprising, we witnessed how the Internet’s open and
decentralized ecosystem allowed citizens to exercise their basic human rights. These
citizens used Web services to dispel misinformation, organize, and communicate with not
only each other but also the rest of the world.
To further promote the Internet’s inclusive, multi-stakeholder model, we highlight the
following high-level principles for future Internet governance:
1) Expanding broadband access: The Internet is a gateway to knowledge, cultures,
services, commerce, and communication. Internet users deserve the ability to freely
access this information to enjoy the economical and societal benefits available online. In
the case of SMEs previously mentioned, these businesses in developing countries often
cite poor access to technology as a significant barrier.[6] Governance should promote the
expansion of access to broadband networks for all of the world’s citizens to engage in this
participatory platform.
2) Promoting the free flow of information: In addition to promoting increased access by
global Internet users, any model of governance must promote the free flow of information,
which is critical to the knowledge sharing, self-expression, and assembly that are
characteristic of the Internet.
3) Increasing Inclusiveness: Individual users, governments, civil society, businesses,
academics, and members of the technical community drive the Internet’s decentralized
model. All of these stakeholders are invested in the continued success of the Internet and
have a stake in preserving it as a critical platform for communication and information
exchange. The process of reaching decisions regarding the future model of Internet
governance must be inclusive of this diverse and knowledgeable group.
4) Maintaining user trust: Given that the Internet is integral to all aspects of our daily
lives, stakeholders must preserve its security, stability, and resiliency. Our member
companies are committed to maintaining Internet users’ trust when they access and
interact with our companies’ online services. As Internet users access personalized
services and information online, they trust that their online experience will be secure.
Governments should recognize limitations on their ability to collect information on Internet
users’ that respect users’ privacy interests. Internet governance policies should also
encourage openness, transparency, and accountability.
The Internet Association believes that maintaining the Internet’s current, open model is
critical to the continued success of the platform but also to future economic prosperity
around the globe. Internet governance should foster innovation and technical
development while creating economic opportunities at all levels. Implementing the
principles outlined above will ensure that stakeholders preserve the Internet as an
important platform for commerce, trade, and communication. We look forward to our
continued engagement on this issue.
Respectfully Submitted,
/s/ Michael Beckerman
President & CEO
The Internet Association
[1]The Internet Association represents the world’s leading Internet companies including:
Airbnb, Amazon, AOL, eBay, Expedia, Facebook, Gilt, Google, IAC, LinkedIn, Lyft,
Monster Worldwide, Netflix, Practice Fusion, Rackspace, reddit, Salesforce.com,
SurveyMonkey, TripAdvisor, Twitter, Uber Technologies, Inc., Yahoo!, Yelp, and Zynga.
[2] The Boston Consulting Group, The Internet Economy in the G-20: The $4.2 Trillion
Growth Opportunity (Mar. 2012), available at
http://www.bcg.com/documents/file100409.pdf [hereinafter BCG Report].
[3] Id. at 14.
[4] Id.
[5] ITU, Fourth Draft of the Secretary-General’s Report for the Fifth World
Telecommunication/Information and Communication Technology Policy Forum 2013
, released January 10, 2013 at 4.
[6] BCG Report at 16.