Statement of Principles Submitted to NETMundial by the
Internet Governance Caucus
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Mawaki Chango
Region: Cote d'Ivoire
Organization: Internet Governance Caucus
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: transparent, accountable, inclusive, equitable, human rights
Abstract
Internet governance processes and decisions should be open and inclusive, bottom-up
and consensus-based in their approach. All stakeholders from all regions of the world
should be given equal opportunity to participate. Technical design decisions should be
weighed against societal implications of the technology so as to minimize erosion of
individual freedom and liberties.
Document
The Internet Governance Caucus (IGC) wishes to thank the organizers of the NETMundial
meeting, for the invitation to contribute to its proceedings through a written submission
ahead of the meeting. At this point in time, the IGC is hereby submitting the following
statement of a few fundamental principles to guide Internet governance processes and
decisions.
1- Internet governance institutions and processes should be open and inclusive. They
should be bottom-up and consensus-based in their approach to policy development.
Internet governance institutions and processes should be transparent, accountable, and
enable the meaningful participation of all stakeholders.
2- All Internet governance decision making processes must ensure the inclusion of not
just all stakeholders but also all regions of the world in an equitable manner. As a result, a
special effort must be engaged in order to provide the Less Developed Countries with an
equitable share of resources to participate in activities related to worldwide internet
governance.
3- Any decision to evolve the internet governance institutional field and mechanisms as
well as any new structure evolving from the current configuration of the implementation of
the IANA functions and the role of US Government and of the other incumbents in that
regard, must reflect the effective inclusion of all regions of the world with a view to
ensuring a truly global cultural diversity in approaches to technical and policy problems.
4- The technical community working on core protocols and technical standards of the
Internet should seek a broad understanding of the societal implications of their design
decisions and carefully weigh the advantages of the technological capabilities they are
enabling against their potential adverse effects on individual users’ freedom and liberties.
This should be done with a view to minimizing outcomes that continuously erode said
freedom and liberties, leaving the Internet user vulnerable to all sorts of abuse.
5 – Namely, whether it is by virtue of technical design or by policy provisions, on-line
users must enjoy the same human rights as they are entitled to off-line.
6- There must not be discrimination in access and contents due to criteria such as
opinion, religion, race, gender, geography, language, or economic resources.
7- Services offered in the internet must remain equitable and neutral among service
providers, without taking unfair advantage of a dominant or privileged position.
8- Internet availability, deployment, and service conditions must benefit all segments of
the human society, not just those enjoying richer economic development.