Document

The Internet Governance Caucus (IGC) wishes to thank the organizers of the NETMundial meeting, for the invitation to contribute to its proceedings through a written submission ahead of the meeting. At this point in time, the IGC is hereby submitting the following statement of a few fundamental principles to guide Internet governance processes and decisions.  

 

1- Internet governance institutions and processes should be open and inclusive. They should be bottom-up and consensus-based in their approach to policy development.  Internet governance institutions and processes should be transparent, accountable, and enable the meaningful participation of all stakeholders.

 

2- All Internet governance decision making processes must ensure the inclusion of not just all stakeholders but also all regions of the world in an equitable manner. As a result, a special effort must be engaged in order to provide the Less Developed Countries with an equitable share of resources to participate in activities related to worldwide internet governance. 

 

3- Any decision to evolve the internet governance institutional field and mechanisms as well as any new structure evolving from the current configuration of the implementation of the IANA functions and the role of US Government and of the other incumbents in that regard, must reflect the effective inclusion of all regions of the world with a view to ensuring a truly global cultural diversity in approaches to technical and policy problems.

 

4- The technical community working on core protocols and technical standards of the Internet should seek a broad understanding of the societal implications of their design decisions and carefully weigh the advantages of the technological capabilities they are enabling against their potential adverse effects on individual users’ freedom and liberties. This should be done with a view to minimizing outcomes that continuously erode said freedom and liberties, leaving the Internet user vulnerable to all sorts of abuse.

 

 

5 – Namely, whether it is by virtue of technical design or by policy provisions, on-line users must enjoy the same human rights as they are entitled to off-line.

6- There must not be discrimination in access and contents due to criteria such as opinion, religion, race, gender, geography, language, or economic resources.

7- Services offered in the internet must remain equitable and neutral among service providers, without taking unfair advantage of a dominant or privileged position.

8- Internet availability, deployment, and service conditions must benefit all segments of the human society, not just those enjoying richer economic development.