ROADMAPS AND PRINCIPLES OF FURTHER EVOLUTION OF
INTERNET GOVERNANCE IN LESS DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES.
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Placidus Ikechukwu EJIMADU
Region: Nigeria
Organization: Our Rights (OR)
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: Freedom, Transparency, Equality, Openness, Tunis Agenda
and public policy.
Abstract
This set of proposal is very important to raise the issue ?Internet Governance in the
world?, especially in the Less Developed Countries, that the internet is for all in equal
bases in transparency, and Accessibility to all multi-stakeholders in the world.The
Internet's role in helping LDCs' development, the role in promoting human rights, public
policy as well as peace and security cannot be overemphasized.
Document
Document.
The Meeting which shall be held in Sao Paulo, must offers some of basic principles and
roadmap to build good environment for Internet Governance for all stakeholder in the
world taking in
Consideration the freedom for expression, opinion and equal of the accessibility for all
stakeholder. IGF is official status. It is the only official forum within the U.N. system to
deal with -- which is specifically tailored for suggestion about public policies about Internet
governance.
PRINCIPLES
It is the broadness or potential broadness of our topics because according to the Tunis
Agenda, , IGF is mandated to discuss public policy issues on human rights as well as
peace, security, cyber security and privacy protection.
The exercise of human rights on the Internet is an issue of increasing interest and
Importance as the rapid pace of technological advancement and the constant evolution of
Pervasive digital mediums give rise to novel legal rights, obligations and scenarios.
The Less Developed Countries must also be protected online, and should not be held to
different standards. Therefore, the human right for all people in the internet must be
protected and secure, so that everyone can feel secure and able to express about his
opinion in easy way. It’s very important for the Democratically in the LDC’s to find the right
way to forward so it need help, because it’s in the early stage of freedom and democracy.
The Citizens of Less Developed Countries should be able to send electronic
communications to one another free from the fear of surveillance, monitoring, interception
or any other violation of privacy. Where interference is unavoidable for the purpose of
security, such interference must follow clearly defined processes as laid down by law as
spams are always common.
We ask the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance to
formally challenge the Tunis Agenda’s definition of stakeholder ‘roles’ by adopting the
equal status’ principle stated above. We ask that the Meeting overtly recognize and
defend the modifications of traditional policy making authority inherent in the
multistakeholder model.
The advocates of this new principle recognize that there are numerous areas where the
traditional role of the state is appropriate and necessary, such as legislation and law
enforcement in territorial jurisdictions. Yet because so much of the policies and services of
the Internet are transnational, we believe that Internet governance must change their
traditional roles and give all stakeholders the same status in the formulation of policy and
encourage government participation from Less Developed Countries.
If we can be producing tangible results I mean the outcome of the discussions which IGF
can develop in forms of non-binding opinions or recommendations or policy principles on
all these topics as mentioned above. I believe the outcomes of IGF would be very useful
to different sectors. That would also raise the attractiveness of IGF.