Argentinean Ministry of Foreign Affairs contribution to NET
mundial
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Olga Cavalli
Region: Argentina
Organization: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Argentina
Sector: Government
Keywords: freedom of expression, human rights
Abstract
Principles of Internet Governance
Document
Principles of Internet Governance
1. Full respect for human rights.
2. Respect for freedom of expression.
3. Respect for the privacy of individuals and the protection of personal data, avoiding
surveillance and collection of personal data in an arbitrarily way and / or contrary to the
law, avoiding also supervision by corporations or governments that do not comply with
due process.
4. Respect the rights of consumers and users, promoting a comprehensive framework
to enhance consumer protection online.
5. Internet governance should be based on democratic and multistakeholder processes,
where all stakeholders have relevant representation and their views can be taken in
consideration, with special attention given to the role of governments, and the need to
increase their participation in decision-making processes and in the debates and
discussions.
6. Promote greater transparency in Internet governance.
7. Promote an information society based on knowledge sharing, preserving the security,
stability and continuity of the Internet.
8. Promote the right to Internet as a techno-cultural tool to enhance personal and social
development at the national, regional and global level.
9. Promote fair and equitable universal access for all, with special emphasis on
vulnerable people, girls and women, seniors and people with special needs.
10. Respect the culture and language diversity, where the Internet should be the platform
for creating and sharing content in the preferred language.
11. Promote the development of a neutral network, avoiding filtering and traffic
restrictions.
12. Promote a responsible use of the Internet, based on education and awareness for the
prevention of vulnerabilities and attacks.
13. Promote balanced geographic representation of all regions in organizations of the
ecosystem of Internet Governance, where special attention must be given to gender
balance.
14. Promote cooperation to improve the collection and dissemination of information
related to security, promoting also the exchange good practices among all stakeholders.