Commonwealth Cybergovernance Model
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation
Region: Commonwealth
Organization: Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: Commonwelth, Cyber, governance, principles
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 2
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 3
Abstract
Recognising the central importance of the internet to Commonwealth members and
following the Abuja Declaration of Proposed Commonwealth Cybergovernance Model of 9
October 2013 and subsequent consultations, the Commonwealth Telecommunications
Organisation offers this draft set of principles for consideration and adoption during the
Commonwealth ICT Ministers Forum. The principles are intended to guide
Commonwealth members to plan and implement practical actions in policy development,
regulation and legislation, cross-border collaboration, capacity building, technical
measures and other operational activities.
Document
Commonwealth ICT Ministers Forum 2014
Marlborough House, London
3 - 4 March 2014
Commonwealth Cybergovernance Model
1. Introduction
1.1. Recognising the central importance of the internet to Commonwealth members and
following the Abuja Declaration of Proposed Commonwealth Cybergovernance Model of 9
October 2013 and subsequent consultations, the Commonwealth Telecommunications
Organisation offers this draft set of principles for consideration and adoption during the
Commonwealth ICT Ministers Forum. The principles are intended to guide
Commonwealth members to plan and implement practical actions in policy development,
regulation and legislation, cross-border collaboration, capacity building, technical
measures and other operational activities.
2. Cyberspace – the internet and more
2.1. We are in an era of changing economic circumstances creating both opportunity and
uncertainty, giving rise to new trade and economic patterns together with unforeseen
threats to peace and security, and a surge in popular demands for democracy, human
rights and for broadened social and economic opportunities. Previously unimagined
access to information and communication between individuals across our planet is driving
economic and social development in the 21st century. Cyberspace [1] provides this
access, helping us to bridge the digital divide while influencing every aspect of our
economic and social activities. Cyberspace is becoming our global central nervous
system. Cyberspace continues to develop at a pace unparalleled in our history - growth
is anticipated from 2bn to 4bn users by 2020[2], many in developing countries. This pace
of change necessitates urgent action in reaching consensus on Cybergovernance.
2.2. Its open, decentralised and distributed nature, that empowers the individual, has
fostered innovation, collaboration and rapid development. Enjoyment of those benefits
relies upon its safety, security and resilience. Cyberspace can also be a vehicle for crime,
extremism and other social ills[3]. Governments, industry, civil society and users have a
shared responsibility[4] to tackle those threats to society. Necessary security measures
may be in tension with the very features that have made Cyberspace a success and, in
determining an equitable balance, our behaviour in Cyberspace will benefit from our
shared Commonwealth values that govern many aspects of our lives.
3. Applying Commonwealth values in
Cyberspace
3.1. The Commonwealth Charter of March 2013 reflects the values and aspirations which
unite the Commonwealth - democracy, development, human rights and the rule of law.
The Charter expresses the commitment of member states to the development of free and
democratic societies and the promotion of peace and prosperity to improve the lives of all
peoples of the Commonwealth. It also acknowledges the role of civil society in supporting
the goals and values of the Commonwealth.
3.2. The principles concerning our use of Cyberspace today and the evolving nature of
Cyberspace tomorrow should be derived from, should respect and reflect our shared
Commonwealth values as set out in the Commonwealth Charter. Within the context of the
Charter as a whole, we identify the key characteristics, which led to our principles, as
exemplified in Appendix 1. This analysis is based on the principle that what is
unacceptable off-line is unacceptable on-line. Priorities for practical action, in accordance
with these principles, will depend on the prevailing circumstances in each country.
4. Commonwealth principles for the
use of Cyberspace
4.1. As we operate in Cyberspace and work with others to shape its continuing
development, we will use the following principles to guide our decisions, actions and
demonstrate our progress towards meeting these principles. The principles are best
considered collectively and not each in isolation without regard to the whole because
frequently some are in tension with each other. We reiterate the urgency with which these
issues need to be addressed.
Principle 1: We contribute to a safe and an effective global
Cyberspace
as a partnership between public and private sectors, civil society and
users, a collective creation;
with multi-stakeholder, transparent and collaborative governance
promoting continuous development of Cyberspace;
where investment in the Cyberspace is encouraged and rewarded;
by providing sufficient neutrality of the network as a provider of information
services;
by offering stability in the provision of reliable and resilient information
services;
by having standardisation to achieve global interoperability;
by enabling all to participate with equal opportunity of universal access;
as an open, distributed, interconnected internet;
by providing an environment that is safe for its users, particularly the
young and vulnerable;
made available to users at an affordable price.
Principle 2: Our actions in Cyberspace support broader
economic and social development
by enabling innovation and sustainable development, creating greater
coherence and synergy, through collaboration and the widespread
dissemination of knowledge;
respecting cultural and linguistic diversity without the imposition of beliefs;
promoting cross-border delivery of services and free flow of labour in a
multi-lateral trading system;
allowing free association and interaction between individuals across
borders;
supporting and enhancing digital literacy;
providing everyone with information that promotes and protects their rights
and is relevant to their interests, for example to support transparent and
accountable government;
enabling and promoting multi-stakeholder partnerships;
facilitating pan-Commonwealth consultations and international linkages in
a globally connected space that also serves local interests.
Principle 3: We act individually and collectively to tackle
cybercrime[5]
nations, organisations and society work together to foster respect for the
law;
to develop relevant and proportionate laws to tackle Cybercrime effectively;
to protect our critical national and shared infrastructures;
meeting internationally-recognised standards and good practice to deliver
security;
with effective government structures working collaboratively within and
between states;
with governments, relevant international organisations and the private
sector working closely to prevent and respond to incidents.
Principle 4: We each exercise our rights and meet our
responsibilities in Cyberspace
we defend in Cyberspace the values of human rights, freedom of
expression and privacy as stated in our Charter of the Commonwealth;
individuals, organisations and nations are empowered through their
access to knowledge;
users benefit from the fruits of their labours; intellectual property is
protected accordingly;
users can benefit from the commercial value of their own information;
accordingly, responsibility and liability for information lies with those who
create it;
responsible behaviour demands users all meet minimum Cyber hygiene
requirements;
we protect the vulnerable in society in their use of Cyberspace;
we, individually and collectively, understand the consequences of our
actions and our responsibility to cooperate to make the shared
environment safe; our obligation is in direct proportion to culpability and
capability.
5 Practical application of these
principles
5.1. Each Commonwealth member may find it beneficial to develop individually, a whole
of government strategy, reflecting the many facets in making Cyberspace safe, secure,
resilient and rewarding, that will address unique local needs of countries with their
different regions, sectors and industries and deliver their particular economic and social
priorities.
5.2. Appendix 2 offers a guide to sample practical actions that can be taken by
Commonwealth members, based on these principles. Appendix 3 provides a list of
organisations offering practical guidance on Cybersecurity. Appendix 2 and 3, for
guidance only, are illustrative and new initiatives in this fast-moving topic may not be
reflected.
