Roadmap for the future development of the Internet
Governance ecosystem
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Olga Cavalli
Region: Argentina
Organization: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Argentina
Sector: Government
Keywords: Multistakeholder equal footing balance
Abstract
Roadmap for the future development of the Internet Governance ecosystem: Strengthen
the organizations of the Internet ecosystem (I * Organizations) through increasing the
participation of all relevant stakeholders from all regions, including governments and
taking into account gender balance.
Document
Argentina and Internet Governance
Argentina is actively involved in all areas of debate and participation in Internet
Governance: ICANN, IGF, Regional IGF regional, regional meetings of the Latin America
and Caribbean Information Society Plan of Action, eLAC, among others.
Argentina believes that a new development of the ecosystem of Internet Governance
should be achieved through the strengthening of existing structures based on the multistakeholder
model where all stakeholders are equally represented, including
governments, from all the regions and considering gender balance.
Argentina supports the multi-stakeholder model for the Internet governance and
recognizes the value of involving all stakeholders, with special attention given to their
respective roles.
Argentina recognizes that Internet governance is more than the allocation of domain
names and IP addresses. It includes also aspects of public policy, as expressed in
paragraph 58 of the Tunis Agenda adopted by WSIS, highlighting that the responsibility of
the definition of these policies rests within the States and this is an inalienable right.
Therefore, it is understood that the current ecosystem of Internet governance must evolve
towards a more balanced model that guarantees the participation of all parties on an
equal footing, in particular the least developed countries, taking into consideration the
current and future Internet.
In this scenario, governements play a critical role in Internetr governance and efforts must
be made to increase their participation in the decision-making processes and in the
debates and discussions.
Argentina recognizes the need for a greater cooperation, to enable governments, on an
equal footing, play their role and responsibilities in international public policy issues
pertaining to the Internet.
Roadmap for the future development of the Internet Governance ecosystem
Strengthen the organizations of the Internet ecosystem (I * Organizations) through
increasing the participation of all relevant stakeholders from all regions, including
governments and taking into account gender balance.
In particular, the following recommendations are made:
On the Internationalization of ICANN:
Promote the internationalization of ICANN, through a deep revision of the current
structure.
Achieve relevant and active representation from all regions and all actors in the ICANN
structure, including representatives of governments on an equal footing, taking into
account gender balance. These principles should be specially considered in the following
Advisor Commitees and Supporting Organizations:
• The ICANN board
• The Security and Stability Advisor Committee (SSAC)
• The Generic Names Supporting Organization (GNSO)
Governmental Advisory Committee GAC :
Promote the participation of as many countries as possible, especially developing
countries.
Promote the rotation of all the regions in the GAC chair and vice roles, creating five
permanent vice-chairs, one from each region, elected by consensus, within each region.
Take in consideration the suggested changes made by the GAC restructuring working
group specially formed, led by Spain where Argentina has participated.
IANA- RIRs - ISOC – IETF
Strengthen the structure of IANA and the RIRs through the relevant participation of
representatives of all stakeholders including representatives of governments, universities,
civil society and private sector, who should be all involved in the decision making process
related to related to critical Internet resources.
Promote relevant and ongoing participation of experts of all regions in decision-making
spaces of the Internet Society and the Internet Engineering Task Force.
There is sufficient experience and trained professionals in all regions of the world, even in
countries with a lower degree of relative development, to be considered as suitable
candidates for general participation and for leadership positions in these organizations,
including board of directors.
There should be gender balance in the board of directors and leadership positions in
these organizations, there are enough women professionals perfectly able to be
considered as good candidates for these positions.
Internet Governance Forum:
Strengthen the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), as the main global forum where
Internet Governance is debated, where all stakeholders participate on an equal footing.
Strenghthen the mechanisms to promote the participation of all stakeholders from
developing countries in the Internet Governance Forum (IGF).
