Capacity development and e-participation: indispensable
elements in the IG ecosystem
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Virginia Paque
Region: Malta
Organization: DiploFoundation
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: e-participation, capacity development, participation, inclusion
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Capacity development and e-participation are essential for achieving a legitimate and
effective Internet governance ecosystem. They can contribute towards ensuring genuine
multistakeholderism by closing the gap between a sheer possibility to participate and the
reality of being able to do it in a meaningful way. The effectiveness and legitimacy of the
Internet governance (IG) ecosystem depends on the individual and institutional capacity of
actors to participate fully in global IG multistakeholder processes. Capacity development
should support and facilitate policy socialisation as a way to acquire the skills and
understanding necessary to succeed in an IG environment with its high diversity of
professional, national and institutional cultures. Online participation should be a standard
part of event design, as much as any other infrastructure specification, such as Internet
access or audio support for speakers.
Document
Capacity development and e-participation: indispensable elements in the IG
ecosystem
Capacity development and e-participation are essential for achieving a legitimate and
effective Internet governance ecosystem. They can contribute towards ensuring genuine
multistakeholderism by closing the gap between a sheer possibility to participate and the
reality of being able to do it in a meaningful way.
The effectiveness and legitimacy of the Internet governance (IG) ecosystem depends on
the individual and institutional capacity of actors to participate fully in global IG
multistakeholder processes. Capacity development should support and facilitate policy
socialisation as a way to acquire the skills and understanding necessary to succeed in an
IG environment with its high diversity of professional, national and institutional cultures.
Capacity Development for Internet Governance (CD IG) should build on the capacity
development achievements of ISOC, DiploFoundation, ICANN, and ITU, among others.
CD IG aims to inspire and support change towards a new IG framework by:
· moving beyond a simplistic view of capacity development as training, towards a holistic
approach (‘CD 360’) involving institutional development, coaching, policy immersion and
other interventions tailored for specific capacity development needs and environments;·
emphasising soft or social capacities, including operational capacities (intercultural
communication, leadership, organisational culture and values, problem-solving skills) and
adaptive capacities (ability to analyse and adapt, change readiness and management,
confidence);· ensuring local ownership of capacity development, and considering local
political, social, cultural and other specific conditions in developing and implementing
capacity development programmes and activities;· promoting openness to ‘lessons
learnt’ and flexibility to modify approaches as required;· integrating capacity
development within policy processes, for example by providing ‘just-in-time learning’ as a
part of policy processes;· introducing IG and related topics in the curriculum of academic
post-graduate studies; · facilitating the emergence of an enabling environment where
developed individual and institutional capacities can effectively address needs (legal
framework and policies).
Genuine and sustainable empowerment can be achieved thorough holistic capacity
development on individual, organisational, system and network levels, as it is visualised in
the capacity development ‘butterfly’ (methodology used by the Swiss Agency for
Development and Cooperation).
Figure 1. Capacity development butterfly
E/remote/online participation in global/regional policy meetings has evolved from an
experiment to a proven method for inclusive participation. IGF, ICANN, ITU, among
others, have had a pioneering role in developing online participation in global policy
making, and this should now be institutionalised.
Online participation must now be offered as a standard method of attendance to all open
meetings, as a possibility for the inclusion of those without access to the requirements for
in situ attendance (funding/time/other). An effective online participation should be an
important criterion for evaluating the legitimacy and policy relevance of international
meetings.
Online participation should be a standard part of event design, as much as any other
infrastructure specification, such as Internet access or audio support for speakers. Online
participation should be a fixed part of the budget for events. International organizations
should adjust procedures in order to facilitate effective online participation (e.g. role of
chair, effective moderation, broadcasting translation in multiple languages, real-time text
captioning).