Engagement of small-country actors in Internet Governance
processes
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Shelley-Ann Clarke-Hinds
Region: Trinidad and Tobago
Organization: Ministry of Science and Technology
Sector: Government
Keywords: meaningful participation, multistakeholder, small country actors
Abstract
This submission serves to highlight the prevailing concern of effective participation of
small-country actors, and in particular those of Small Island Developing States (SIDS),
within Internet Governance processes for which there are considerable policy implications
for the socio-economic development and sustainability of such small countries.
Document
The articulation of a succinct global development agenda leveraging Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs) at the turn of the new century proved valuable for
the discussions among Small Island Development States (SIDS) on addressing
vulnerability. Although implicitly, the traditional focus among associations comprising such
constituents often excluded new areas and actors in external policy with some reason. It
is worth reiterating that both phases of the World Summit on the Information Society
(WSIS) underscore the promise that the Information Society holds for the sustainable
development of countries, and make mention of special attention to be paid to the
particular needs of the citizens of developing countries including SIDS.
The multi-stakeholder governance model founded on clear rules and principles is
undoubtedly the key to maintaining a free and open Internet through which all people are
free to express, create, communicate and innovate and, more specifically, enjoy the
human rights, fundamental freedoms and democratic values that are guaranteed to them
by the Universal Charter on Human Rights. To this end, the policy authority of the State is
recognised and required to ensure that balance is afforded to all of its citizens using the
Internet. The foundation of Internet economies, and the prosperity of economic
constituents are also of vital interest to the State, given that SIDS are susceptible to
becoming more vulnerable as a consequence of globalisation and increasingly liberalised
trade.
Nonetheless, real challenges and complexities arise for small-country actors which are
related to the existing multi-stakeholder process for Internet Governance where there is
an acute dearth of capacity for the engagement of both state and non-state actors in said
process. This results in low or no participation in diverse and sometimes fragmented fora
regardless of their decision-making or shaping nature. Non-state actors are particularly
challenged from the perspective of influence. In this context, a hybrid situation occurs
where despite the existence of strong democratic tradition and practice, governments in
SIDS, where appropriate, take the lead on various external engagements that, in turn,
benefit all actors.
A two-fold dilemma arises where firstly, access achievements are incongruous to wider
ICT/Information Society achievements (for which the State is attributable) because of a
real organisational shortcoming within governments to address the diverse set of
domestic public policy interests that are attendant to infrastructural development. These
interests span across the areas of cybercrime, data protection/privacy, and intellectual
property to name a few, and even touch upon traditional aspects of economic policy such
as competitiveness and innovation. Secondly, the public policy process becomes distorted
in that exogenous agents drive its development as opposed to internal conditions.
ICTs have been particularly useful in partially addressing the capacity challenge where
training is increasingly being offered through distance learning to sensitise policy makers
on the scope and nature of challenges within Internet Governance debates. These efforts
appear somewhat disconnected to the diverse spaces through which public policy is
addressed. For instance, the venue’s distance from capital, duration and sometimes
duplicative agendas of meetings put a considerable strain on the already limited
resources of SIDS. While remote participation is also acknowledged as a tool for solving
this matter, it may be inconsistent across fora and sometimes underdeveloped because of
its dependencies and inherent shortcomings in facilitating meaningful participation and
exchanges from small-country actors.
In light of the foregoing, there is a call for consideration and meaningful action to be made
for developing countries including SIDS, which must be included in future formulae for
multi-stakeholder governance.