Orange contribution for the NETmundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Francois COMET
Region: Deputy to the Chief Regulatory Officer Orange Group
Organization: Orange
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords:
Abstract
Orange has been actively involved in the Internet governance debate across many
different fora for many years and is pleased to submit a Contribution as input into the
Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance, to be held 23 - 24
April 2014 in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Document
Orange contribution for the NETmundial
Orange has been actively involved in the Internet governance debate across many
different fora for many years and is pleased to submit a Contribution as input into the
Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance, to be held 23 - 24
April 2014 in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
We commend the effort deployed by the Government of Brazil to convene this
NETmundial conference.
Orange is one of the world’s leading telecommunications operators with more than 236
million customers worldwide and 41 billion euros revenues in 2013. Orange footprint
encompasses 32 countries both in Europe and in the Middle East Africa region and is
therefore well acquainted with operational networks and internet issues in both developed
and developing markets. Orange is also a leading provider of global IT and
telecommunication services to multinational companies, under the brand Orange
Business Services.
As an electronic communications provider with worldwide presence, Orange has been an
active stakeholder to GSMA’s and ETNO’s Contributions to the NETmundial.
Internet Governance Principles
Orange supports a universal set of high-level principles relating to the Internet. The overall
aim of these principles should be to restore customers’ trust and digital confidence,
preserve the open nature of the Internet and allow for its continued growth, resilience and
stability.
To reach this objective, we are of the opinion that the primary focus of NETmundial should
be on establishing Principles for the Governance of the Internet as opposed to Internet
regulation.
In this respect such principles could address the need to promote :
- An evolved global Internet governance model, building on existing multi-stakeholder
foundations and bodies, with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders, on an equal
footing and in a democratic, transparent, open and collaborative manner. This governance
model should be based on a multi-stakeholder accountability mechanism for all actors
involved in any decision making process.This model is the best suited to the dynamic
nature of the Internet
- The sheer respect for the individual and fundamental human rights, such as privacy,
freedom of speech and security. The same rule of law should apply online as it does
offline and the customers should enjoy the same protection in both situations. This
approach must be applied along the whole value chain and be independent of underlying
technology and services
- The legitimacy and trust of the governance model through bolstered inclusiveness and
a wider geographical representativeness, particularly vis?à?vis developing and emerging
country stakeholders (governments, private sector, civil society, technical community, and
academia)
- An economically sustainable, interconnected, secure, stable and resilient Internet.
Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Model: Roadmap
In terms of a roadmap for an evolved Internet governance model, Orange calls for a
review of the multi-stakeholder model, identifying when and where various stakeholder
groups should be included in policy debates.
The following premises could be pushed by the NETmundial:
- Decision-taking processes in the realm of Internet Governance need to be transparent
and decision-makers must be held accountable for their decisions.
- The review process should seek to acknowledge and clarify the roles of the various
actors and institutions in the Internet governance landscape, identifying overlapping areas
where they exist. In particular, the review process should seek to define the legitimate
involvement of Governments in Internet governance debates. Orange recognizes that
Governments are instrumental in high-impact Internet public policy issues such as
cybersecurity, privacy, child protection, intellectual property and other societal issues.
- The review process should also ensure that Electronic Communications operators’ role
be duly taken into account in any discussions affecting the Internet infrastructure, given
the ever growing crucial role of connectivity functions in the Internet ecosystem.
- The globalisation of ICANN, including the IANA function, should continue to evolve
towards a multi-stakeholder accountability framework, through a process that maintains
and protects the resilience, the security and the stability of the global Internet.
In this respect Orange welcomes the program initiated by ICANN’s President and Board in
this field and believes it constitutes a significant step towards a better inclusion of
developing and emerging country stakeholders.
Concerning the IANA function, and maintenance of the root zone, globalization means
considering this function as part of the ICANN operational mission without any contractual
relationship or stewardship agreement with a single Government or an only-Government
structure.
The AoC should evolve to an agreement between ICANN as a legal organization and the
ICANN community and stakeholders including Governments represented through the
Governmental Advisory Committee.
Concerning these topics, Orange supports the recent ICANN Board’s resolution to create
President’s Advisory Groups addressing them and ICANN President’s work to reshape
and globalize ICANN.
- It is important to address the Internet-related perceived issues, often referred as “orphan
issues,” for which relevant existing solution mechanisms have not be identified or for
which new mechanisms may have to be developed.