Mozilla Submission on Evolving Internet Governance
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: M. Chris Riley, Alexander Fowler
Region: United States
Organization: Mozilla
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: dispute resolution; global socioeconomic benefit
Abstract
Mozilla offers the following comments on principles for Internet governance and
suggestions for its evolution and implementation. The submission is broken into three
sections. The first section discusses five important concepts for implementing Internet
governance principles to preserve the Internet as an engine for global social and
economic benefit: Do No Harm; Openness; Innovation; Opportunity; and Competence.
The second section addresses the current Internet governance environment, highlighting
the features of it that are most important to preserving key Internet benefits for the future.
The final section suggests that Internet governance can be conceptualized as a fourphase
arc, and that functionally separating structures across these phases may be helpful
to balance broad inclusion with efficiency of decision-making.
Document
Executive Summary
Mozilla offers the following comments on principles for Internet governance and
suggestions for its evolution and implementation. The submission is broken into three
sections: comments on putting principles for Internet governance into practice; elements
of building and analyzing a roadmap for the broad Internet governance ecosystem; and
original lenses and interpretations of the process of Internet governance that may help
achieve an optimal balance of inclusivity and efficiency.
The first section discusses five important concepts for implementing Internet governance
principles to preserve the Internet as an engine for global social and economic benefit:
1. Do No Harm: Maintain a light touch approach to governance of the Internet’s
technical layers;
2. Openness: Promote unrestricted global Internet communications;
3. Innovation: Let use and adoption of new and/or improved Internet applications and
services drive growth and policy;
4. Opportunity: Allow diverse voices to participate in Internet governance with equal
opportunity; and
5. Competence: Incorporate ample technical expertise in all Internet governance
bodies and processes.
These are not intended as proposed substitutes for the principles of others, but rather as
complements to them, and ways in which to think about Internet governance principles as
they are interpreted into practical structures and systems.
The second section addresses the current Internet governance environment, highlighting
the features of it that are most important to preserving key Internet benefits for the future.
In particular, a broad range of issues should be included within the scope of Internet
governance. Omitting major or controversial issues would risk them being resolved by onesided
processes, or not being addressed at all. The section then explains the tensions
that arise within such a broad scope of issues, and discusses the importance and value of
the multiple forums that have arisen to discuss and work through these tensions.
The final section suggests that Internet governance can be conceptualized as a fourphase
arc, and that functionally separating structures across these phases may be helpful
to balance broad inclusion with efficiency of decision-making. In this view, the four phases
are:
1. Goal identification: Working groups and informal forums with largely like-minded
stakeholders identify desired policy goals and issues;
2. Policy development: Broad, inclusive, open discussion forums allow larger and
diversified groups to develop views and perspectives, and to reach consensus
where feasible.
3. Decision-making: Ad-hoc, specifically purposed bodies make decisions regarding
unresolved issues.
4. Dispute resolution: Balanced, fair, inclusive mechanisms, modeled after juries or
comparable bodies, resolve disagreements, including over the structure or the
output of decision-making bodies.
Section 1. Putting Internet governance principles into practice
This section suggests some complementary concepts and interpretive lenses through
which to implement Internet governance principles into practical structures.
Do No Harm: The first and foremost concept in putting Internet governance principles into
practice must be “do no harm”. Historically, the Internet’s basic architectural structure has
flourished, and a light touch from binding external structures has been essential for that.
Any change in governance structures that would deviate from this history should be
strongly discouraged, as it would put in jeopardy the significant social and economic
benefits that have been delivered by the Internet.
Mozilla’s mission is to build a better Internet and to promote openness, innovation, and
opportunity on the Web. These goals shape Mozilla’s vision for good Internet governance
structures: to promote openness, innovation, and opportunity on the Internet.
Openness: In the context of Internet governance, openness means
promoting global communications and exchanges of ideas, and
discouraging unnecessary barriers, throttles, and limits. The biggest risk in
this space is balkanization or division, which would greatly hamper global
growth and development and should be opposed. Internet governance
principles should be interpreted in practice in a manner that supports
openness of global communications and exchanges.
Innovation: In the context of Internet governance, innovation means
supporting progress and change in online technology driven by user
choice, and encouraging the adoption and use of applications and
services to be the primary driver of the evolution of the Internet, rather
than external factors. Internet governance structures and principles in
practice should be shaped and applied in a manner that encourages
innovation worldwide.
Opportunity: In the context of Internet governance, opportunity means
facilitating and empowering broad, diverse, and meaningful participation
from all segments of the Internet community. Internet users are not merely
consumers; they are also creators, with a valid voice to develop and
incorporate into Internet governance. As Internet governance principles
are turned into practice through structures and bodies, they should be
viewed through the lens of promoting global opportunity.
Substance and Process: Many, if not all, of the sets of principles developed by other
organizations and collaborations that will be submitted include a mix of substance and
process. Process principles describe how to conduct governance, whereas substance
principles identify goals that governance processes ought to achieve. It is not always easy
to separate process from substance in theory or in practice, as processes by their nature
heavily influence the substance of the output of those processes. For example,
substantive goals favored by civil society interests are far less likely to be advanced in the
output of a process that does not include any civil society representation. However, for
purposes of understanding and discussion, efforts to distinguish Internet governance
principles into those that focus primarily on substance from those that focus on process
may have value and may enable more productive conversations.
Competence: A separate, less broadly discussed, requirement for Internet governance is
technical competence. An accurate, current technical understanding of the Internet,
including such key concepts as routing, security, and storage of information, is essential
as a component of major Internet governance processes in order to identify and prevent
harm to the Internet’s core architecture. Governance bodies must incorporate ample
technical expertise at all levels, and seek to share that expertise broadly with all
stakeholders.
Literacy: One of the key requirements for realization of Internet governance principles is
ensuring that diverse stakeholders have not merely the opportunity for nominal
participation, but in fact the literacy and the resources for effective participation. Much of
this burden falls on the activities of the stakeholders, including governments, the private
sector, and civil society, to support the creation and dissemination of educational
materials, and the production of platforms and tools for effective engagement without
requiring constant, expensive international travel. However, Internet governance
structures and bodies themselves have a role to play in advancing literacy and reducing
barriers to effective participation, as well.
Section 2: Key elements of a Roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet
governance ecosystem
This section will briefly describe the necessary breadth of scope for Internet governance,
and discuss normative tensions that arise within that scope and the value of multiple
forums to address those tensions.
Broad scope: The scope of issues that fall within Internet governance and policy
conversations is, by necessity, extremely broad. Thought and planning exercises for
Internet governance structures should aspire to match that full breadth. If the ecosystem
of Internet governance structures and processes excludes issues from the outset as out of
scope, the omitted issues may not see public discussion and may be resolved through
less carefully constructed and thought-out processes, such as pure top-down control by
one stakeholder.
Normative tensions: Key to understanding the challenges faced in a broad Internet
governance ecosystem is recognizing that individual stakeholders seek to advance
normatively different, sometimes incompatible, balances of interest. Viewed from that
lens, one of the primary functions of Internet governance is to create processes and
mechanisms by which different normative views can be developed, expressed, supported,
and opposed (where relevant) by the universe of Internet interests, so that consensus can
be found where possible, and where not, disputes and disagreements can be resolved in
a fair, inclusive, and accurate manner.
Multiple forums: There is no one forum, body, or structure best suited to fully address
every issue within the full scope of Internet governance. No single institution or process
can handle all the diverse aspects of Internet governance because there is no possible
perfect balance of inclusiveness and concrete decision-making, and no possible perfect
balance among all the stakeholders who would need to be satisfied to achieve the
essential legitimacy. Instead, a broad array of forums and bodies has been created over
recent years, and it is this diversity that Internet governance reform conversations
properly begin from.
Section 3: Functional separation of Internet governance phases
This section will describe the Internet governance process as a 4-phase arc as a way of
facilitating understanding and building practical governance structures. It will then explain
the potential benefits of functional separation across the phases to allow for a balance of
inclusivity in discussion and efficacy in decision-making.
4-Phase arc: To build structures that help advance the right principles, it may be helpful
to understand the flow of Internet governance as a 4-phase arc, phases which may be
either conflated or separated in their execution in practice: 1) goal identification; 2)
discussion and development of policy; 3) decision-making processes to resolve normative
differences; and 4) dispute resolution mechanisms.
1. Goal identification: The overall process of Internet governance begins when
individuals, organizations, or aligned parties and interests identify goals to pursue through
Internet governance bodies or structures. Universal awareness and education of policy
issues and contexts is the biggest challenge in practice to successful goal identification.
2. Policy development: Through policy discussion and development, diverse interests
come together in one or more Internet governance forums or bodies to discuss an issue
or a range of issues, learn more about the overlaps or dissimilarities in their preferred
normative outcomes, and adopt (possibly divergent) views on whether specific possible
policy changes are sufficiently acceptable. In this phase, many of the Internet governance
principles come to the fore, such as inclusivity, equal opportunity, and empowerment of all
those who have a stake in the relevant issues.
3. Decision-making: The third phase includes decision-making structures and processes
that can take policy discussions into determinations of action (or inaction). In some
contexts, the same forums that handle policy development and discussion adequately
produce many decisions as well. But in many others, particularly those that involve difficult
public policy issues such as human rights where divergent interests cannot agree,
development and discussion forums built for inclusiveness do not extend well to efficient
and tractable decision-making, without simply ignoring or overruling some voices.
4. Dispute resolution: The fourth phase of the arc is the backstop for problems that may
arise from decision-making structures or processes. Disputes will arise no matter how
carefully structured the policy discussion and decision bodies and processes today or for
years to come. Currently, the Internet governance ecosystem contains few dispute
resolution mechanisms adequate to handle such a challenge, to hear and resolve
grievances between hugely different types of interests.
Functional separation: One way of understanding some objections to the current
Internet governance ecosystem is that many forums for discussion are not built for
efficient decision-making. Rather than try to graft decision-making capabilities onto forums
that are successful at managing inclusive policy discussion and development, functional
separation of decision-making may in many cases be the best approach, into a separate
process, body, or forum that includes key multi-stakeholder voices yet is structured
primarily to produce a decision rather than to maximize inclusion. In that way,
inclusiveness need never be limited at the outset of policy discussion, and if there is a
possible consensus, it can occur before narrowing the scope of inclusion in the
conversation. But, when discussion fails, a subsequent process may be invoked to
achieve a decision, taking the output of discussion processes into account.
Dynamic decision-making: The notion of less-inclusive decision-making bodies poses
significant risk of abuse of power and poor outcomes, because to be efficient and effective
such bodies will often pick a winner and a loser, or try to craft a compromise solution. An
ideal approach to reducing capture of such a body by a specific interest, or set or category
of interests, would be to make decision-making bodies strictly ad hoc, dynamic, and
temporary: creating a new body only after the failure of voluntary and consensus
processes, constructing the body purely to address a single issue or discrete set of
related issues, and subjecting each one to a strict termination date.
Stable dispute resolution: Dispute resolution mechanisms must themselves reflect the
key principles applicable to policy development and decision-making forums. In particular,
to be viewed as legitimate, they must be multi-stakeholder, accountable, transparent, and
inclusive, among other values. Yet, to allow potentially thousands of distinct interests to all
have voice in resolving every dispute would bog down Internet governance processes
interminably. Thus, one model worth considering may be to build and legitimize a large
pool of potential “jurors”, perhaps large enough to include balanced representation from
all interested parties, from which an odd-numbered subset would be chosen at random to
resolve each dispute. Such a stable, inclusive, balanced dispute resolution structure or set
of structures could serve to balance the risks of capture and abuse of power that would
otherwise rise from decision-making bodies, and to create stability and equality of
opportunity among all interests.