Intel Comments for NETMundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Mike Chartier
Region: United States
Organization: Intel
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: do no harm, open, inform
Abstract
Intel commends Brazil for convening and hosting this important dialog on the critical topic
of internet governance and is pleased to submit these comments. Intel is the world's
largest semiconductor chip maker. Since 1968 we have developed the chips and
technology that power the worldwide digital economy. In our submission we offer some
comments on the logistics and work of the meeting, and then provide proposals on the
principles and roadmap.
Document
Intel Comments for NETMundial
Intel commends Brazil for convening and hosting this important dialog on the critical topic
of internet governance and is pleased to submit these comments. Intel is the world's
largest semiconductor chip maker. Since 1968 we have developed the chips and
technology that power the worldwide digital economy. In this submission we would first
like to offer some comments on the logistics and work of the meeting, and then provide
proposals on the principles and roadmap.
COMMENTS ON THE WORK OF THE MEETING
Do No Harm – Help All
The global community, as gathered in the United Nations 68th General Assembly,
acknowledged in Resolution 68/198 “the steady increase in Internet access to one third of
the world’s population, the rapid diffusion of mobile telephony and mobile Internet, the
increased availability of multilingual content and the advent of many information and
communications technologies services and applications, which offer great potential for the
development of the information society.” It went on to stress, however, the “
need to close the digital divide, including with regard to such issues as Internet
affordability, and to ensure that the benefits of new technologies, especially information
and communications technologies, are available to all.” Intel believes these two
statements should serve as buoys to guide the way forward for the work of NETmundial
and the global discussion in general. The meeting should seek to “do no harm” to the
vibrant, innovative, and competitive market for products, services, and ideas, that has
brought the benefits of technology to billions, while striving to expand those benefits to all.
Stay Focused
Secondly, the large number and great diversity of participants, importance of the topic,
and very short duration will preclude extended discussion of detailed proposals. In order
to achieve consensus, the meeting should focus on high-level principles and concepts.
Organization- specific contributions, such as detailed ICANN proposals, should be
remanded to those specific organizations.
Sunshine Process
Finally, for the output of the meeting to gain wide support and legitimacy, it must reflect a
true consensus of the stakeholders. There is currently some lack of transparency in
fundamental aspects of the meeting, such as how participants are chosen to attend, how
representatives of various constituencies were designated, and how output documents
will be deemed approved. It is important that a clear understanding exists at the start of
the meeting of the mechanisms NETmundial will use to ensure that any output reflects
true consensus.
COMMENTS ON PRINCIPLES
As recognized by all, many organizations have produced Internet-related principles such
as UN General Assembly, OECD, UN Human Rights Council, the G8 and others. Some
commenters have derived principles based on a synthesis of these earlier principles.
Given that global discussion around these basic ideas has reached some level of
maturity, we believe the meeting should be able to arrive at a consensus on a set of
principles. In our submission we would just like to highlight two principles we consider
foundational to the continued growth of the Internet.
Commitment to the Multistakeholder Approach
From our vantage point as one of the innovators and key suppliers of technology to the
ICT industry for over forty years, Intel is keenly aware of the efficiency, flexibility, and
resiliency of a multistakeholder approach, especially in the area of day-to-day operations
and technical standards. One of the greatest market challenges was the coordination of
hundreds of thousands of hardware manufacturers with millions of software and
application developers to produce interoperable products, while delivering constant
innovation. Yet a distributed, industry driven approach, where technologies and products
are tried on their technical and market merits has been able to deliver capabilities to
consumers that were considered science fiction just decades ago. Moreover, this
development and standardization process, which is close to the end-user, is also crucial
for rapidly responding to cyber security attacks and threats. Intel realizes the role of
governments in addressing communities that may be underserved by the market, for
instance, through the use of Universal Service programs. However, Intel strongly opposes
the replacement of existing organizations and technical bodies, or the arrogation of the
functions of those bodies, by a new or existing intergovernmental body.
Open Internet
Intel supports the principle (submitted by Germany) that “The global, open and free nature
of the Internet as a single commons has to be ensured. It is a driving force for progress
towards development in its various forms including economic growth, encouraging
innovation and allowing for creativity.” We have been greatly concerned by recently
proposed unilateral actions that would fundamentally alter the single commons nature of
the Internet by enforcing localization mandates. Similar to proposals during WCIT to
replace industry agreements with government-imposed sending-party-pays regimes,
localization requirements seek to alter a fundamental aspect of the internet for parochial
benefit that would result in negative consequences for all parties involved. The ability to
establish, virtually, a global footprint has been a key driver for the growth of many
commercial enterprises. Germany’s mittelstand in particular have benefited significantly
on the low barrier to entry to become an international leader. These companies would
significantly suffer if localization mandates required a physical presence in every market
they served. Also, end users could lose access to products and services and see rising
costs due to reduced competition. Moreover forums for the free expression and exchange
of ideas could be devastated by laws which would dramatically increase operating costs.
We believe data security is not a question of server location but of standardized and
harmonized security technologies, policies, and practices which enable interoperability
and involve all stakeholders developing flexible approaches and mechanisms to improve
cyber-security. We strongly support, however, the announcement to lay an undersea
cable between Europe and South America. Such capacity-building would facilitate better
access for the countries involved and improve access, resiliency, and security for the
entire virtual community.
COMMENTS ON THE Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance
Ecosystem
Inform Not Dictate
The title of this discussion topic was appropriately chosen. As defined in the OED
Evolution is “…the rise or origination of anything by natural development as distinguished
from its production by a specific act.” The evolution of the multistakeholder Internet
governance ecosystem has been an ongoing process as the existing individual
organizations have responded to their changing environment. The companies,
communities and governmental and non-governmental bodies that constitute Internet
Governance engage in internal assessment and improvement on a regular basis. It is
crucial that this process remains a bottoms-up progression. This meeting and similar
forums can, should, and will influence that evolution, but reconfiguring, realigning or
redistributing governance functions by external fiat would have a detrimental and long
lasting impact.
As technology advances developers and innovators utilize new capabilities to create ever
improving and new applications and products. Simultaneously, dramatic cost reductions
and new access technologies allow the benefits of the Internet and ICTs to flow to an ever
increasing percentage of the world’s population. In addition, negative activities such as
malicious cyber security attacks occur requiring immediate attention. And so a
fundamental requirement for all companies, standards bodies, and policy setting
organizations in the ICT Industry is their ability to adapt to change. Moreover, the
processes these organizations use to improve themselves are often open consultations
where all stakeholders have the means to provide input.
For instance ICANN 47 in Durban, South Africa, created five new Strategy Panels to “
build on public input being generated to inform a new, overarching vision and five-year
strategic plan, and subsequent operating plan, for the organization.” The panels, providing
recommendations and guidance for the operation and future of ICANN are directly
relevant to this discussion, especially “ICANN’s Role in the Internet Governance
Ecosystem,” which recently published a comprehensive report including a Roadmap
towards Globalization. Intel commends the work of the panel and recognizes the internal,
consultation process (stakeholders are encouraged to review all the draft reports and
provide comments through 30 April 2014) as the best and only legitimate mechanism for
positive change. We believe it would be counterproductive for this meeting to prescribe
(top down) specific changes for ICANN or any individual organization. While this meeting
should note the detailed proposals have been submitted to this meeting related to
modifications to ICANN, ICANN 50 and internal forums are the appropriate place for their
discussion.
Role of governments
Unquestionably, an issue dominating the global discussion has been the role of
governments in Internet governance. Internet activity, like all human activity, requires a
sphere of security and certainty established by the rule of law in order to flourish.
However, inside that sphere, freedom and flexibility are critical to foster the innovation
needed to realize the potential of technology. This concept is enshrined in Article 69 of the
Tunis Agenda which recognizes:
“the need for enhanced cooperation in the future, to enable governments, on an equal
footing, to carry out their roles and responsibilities, in international public policy issues
pertaining to the Internet, but not in the day-to-day technical and operational matters, that
do not impact on international public policy issues.”
Intel has a long history of fruitful engagement with Administrations to expand the benefits
of ICTs to all segments of society. Our Intel World Ahead program has worked extensively
with governments to adopt policies designed to accelerate broadband adoption, for
instance, via the development of national broadband plans, and improvements in the use
of Universal Service Funds. And we work with governments, stakeholders, and ecosystem
partners to promote capacity-building, as in the area of education where Intel’s Teach
professional development program has enabled 10 million teachers to effectively integrate
technology into their lessons to promote problem-solving, critical thinking and
collaboration skills among their students.
However intergovernmental organizations are poorly structured to address most technical
and operational aspects of the dynamic and fluid Internet and ICT environment. The
current system, while not perfect, largely allows decisions to be made based on their
technical or market merit. It also provides timely feedback to inform investment on those
products and services most valued by consumers (Intel alone has invested over $100
Billion during the WSIS period to maintain the daunting pace of Moore’s law). Perhaps
most importantly, the existing multi-stakeholder model provides the speed and flexibility
needed to address and combat cyber-security attacks and threats. Replacing the current
system with a cumbersome, bureaucratic process requiring decisions based on the
agreement of Administrations, would not only stifle innovation and progress, and lead to
sub-optimal technologies, products and services, but could also lessen overall confidence
and security in the use of ICTs. Accordingly, as mentioned above, Intel strongly opposes
the replacement of existing organizations and technical bodies, or the arrogation of the
functions of those bodies, by a new or existing intergovernmental body.
IN SUMMARY
· The meeting should be guided by the tenet “do no harm,” while it seeks to increase
and disseminate the benefits of ICTs and the Internet.
· At the outset, the meeting should clarify the processes used for designating
representatives of various stakeholder groups and the mechanisms that will be used to
draft and achieve consensus on any output documents.
· We consider the principles of multi-stakeholder approach and an open Internet as
foundational.
· The evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem should be endogenous, that is,
informed by external forums, but not dictated by them.
· Existing or new functions should not be bestowed on an existing or new intergovernmental
organization.