Kuwait Information Technology Society (KITS) Submission
on Internet Governance Principles and Roadmap for the
further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Qusai AlShatti
Region: Kuwait
Organization: Kuwait Information Technology Society
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: Internet Governenance Principles, Internet Governance,
Roadmap for the further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecos
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Kuwait Information Technology Society (KITS) is pleased to provide its input for the
NetMundial Global meeting on the Future of Internet Governance Sao Paolo, Brazil, 23-24
April 2014. KITS contribution on Internet Governance Principles provides a number of
considerations to be noted and highlights a proposed list of principles. KITS submission
includes consideration addressing the Roadmap for the further Evolution of the Internet
Governance Ecosystem.
Document
Kuwait Information Technology Society (KITS) Submission on Internet Governance
Principles and Roadmap for the further Evolution of the Internet Governance
Ecosystem
NetMundial Global Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance
Sao Paolo, Brazil, 23-24 April 2014
Prepared by: Qusai AlShatti
March 8, 2014
Abstract:
Kuwait Information Technology Society (KITS) is pleased to provide its input for the
NetMundial Global meeting on the Future of Internet Governance Sao Paolo, Brazil, 23-24
April 2014. KITS contribution on Internet Governance Principles provides a number of
considerations to be noted and highlights a proposed list of principles. KITS submission
includes consideration addressing the Roadmap for the further Evolution of the Internet
Governance Ecosystem.
Section 1. Internet Governance Principles
Internet Governance (IG) has become an increasingly important issue on global level
since its introduction by the Tunis Agenda in the second phase of the World Summit on
Information Society (WSIS) November 2005. The need for a principle based approach
arises from many factors, part of it are:
The increase role of the Internet in our daily life.
The Internet impact on the economic and social conditions.
The Internet users high growth rate, especially from the developing world,
and their demands.
The need for improved Internet access.
The different views of stakeholders groups from different regions of the
world on matters related to IG.
Considerations on IG Principles:
1.
It is important to agree on the definition of Internet Governance and set the
principles in accordance to it. Over the years many interpretations of what is meant
by IG have been surfaced, however we can say that the only working definition we
have for Internet Governance is paragraph 34 of the Tunis agenda:
“ the development and application by governments, the private sector and civil society, in
their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, rules, decision-making procedures, and
programmes that shape the evolution and use of the Internet.”
1.
Internet Governance and the development of its principles is not only a global issue,
it is a national and a regional issue too. We need to promote a principled based IG
approach on all levels to unify our understanding of IG, the Internet itself and the
respective role of each stakeholder group.
2.
The Issue of sovereignty and national jurisdiction and where or how they are
applied in cyberspace need to be addressed.
3.
Internet Governance principles should not be discussed or addressed as a reaction
to incidents. They should be addressed in terms of the evolution of the Internet to
be a better environment and an improved resource to its users.
4.
Different regions of the world, different stakeholders groups and different cultures
and societies have different priorities and concerns regarding the Internet.
Therefore, It should be acceptable to have diverse sets of principles that are
different from each other as long as they are developed with an acceptable conduct
and as long as they preserve civil rights to an acceptable level. Within that respect,
a global set of a high level IG principles are needed to be developed that is
acceptable to all and that is considered the basic fundamental sets of IG principles
to be followed by everyone.
5.
Over the years, efforts have been made to develop IG principles. These efforts
mostly were made by either an entity from a single stakeholder group or developed
nationally as in the Brazilian model which is considered the only set of principles
that is into effect today. While these efforts can serve as a reference, it is important
that the development of IG principles especially on global level should involve a
balanced global representation of all stakeholder groups from different part of the
world.
6.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political rights, The Geneva Declaration of Principles and The Tunis Agenda should
be the basis of any globally adopted Internet Governance Principles. National
efforts in this direction should reflect also civil rights as stated in national
constitutions and legislations.
Proposed Internet Governance Principles:
1.
Internet Governance is a multistakeholder process in nature. Principles, policy
development and procedures related to IG should be all developed in an open,
inclusive, transparent and democratic process with a balanced involvement and
contributions from all stakeholder groups.
2.
The Internet should be regarded as a public good for all Internet users and
stakeholder groups. They should all be empowered with the capabilities and
resources that the Internet can offer to them.
3.
The same rights applied to people Offline should be applied online. This is should
not only be led by The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political rights, but also by countries constitution and national
legislation. The issue of sovereignty in this respect should be addressed.
4.
All Internet users should be entitled to an equitable, just and open access to the
Internet. Individuals with disabilities, living in rural areas, closed communities,
isolated geographical areas, or belong to indigenous groups are all entitled to the
same equal access.
5.
Freedom of expression, the free flow of information and open access to knowledge
should be preserved to all Internet users.
6.
Net neutrality and open standards development should be preserved and
maintained.
7.
Internet Governance should foster innovation, create opportunities, improve social
and economic conditions in an equal manner to all Internet users. Intellectual
property rights should respected and protected.
8.
Individuals’ privacy and data protection measures in accordance with civil rights and
states sovereignty should be respected. Instruments to protect them from any type
of violation should be established.
9.
The Internet should preserve and promote cultural and linguistic diversity. The
Internet is a borderless place were cultures and people meet, communicate and
outreach. Tools to foster and enrich local content should be promoted and
encouraged.
10.
Internet stability, security, robustness and resilience are crucial factors to establish
user confidence and trust. They are equally important to the economic and social
evolution of the Internet. Within this respect, Internet Governance should ensure
that proper instruments and actions addressing these factors are adequately
addressed and implemented.
11.
The day-to-day technical operation of the Internet is a privately-lead effort by the
technical community independent from the influence of any single government.
Section 2. Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
It is important in the first place to identify the organizations or platforms related to the
Internet Governance Ecosystem. This should be conducted in a neutral manner and an
acceptable consensus on it should be reached.
It is further important that the initiation of any process related to the evolution of the
Internet Governance Ecosystem should be multistakeholder in nature where every
stakeholder group is engaged in equal footing to discuss all matters involved.
The Internet Governance Forum (IGF) has proved to be an effective independent platform
to discuss issues related to IG. Its global success has initiated and influenced many
similar forums on regional and national levels. This is an indicator of how the IGF became
an effective tool to discuss Internet Governance issues. Its open, inclusive and
multistakeholder nature contributed mainly to its success. Its continuation at this stage of
time is essential to all stakeholders groups. However it is important at this stage to
reconsider its format and outcomes in order for it to play a better role on global Internet
governance issues and policy development.
The Internet is a global public good. The Internet Eco System (including Critical Internet
resources: root servers, domain names and addressing), requires a global model that is
fair, open, transparent and accountable to the wide range of Internet users and involved
stakeholders. The global model should be based on the current existing organizations
rather than establishing new legal structures or new umbrellas.
While the discussion on the evolution of the Internet Governence Ecosystem focuses on
the globalization of the ICANN and the IANA functions, It is important to address the
status of other IG related organizations that are limited in its process to a specific
stakeholder group. Such organizations should be open to the equal participation of all
stakeholder groups in any process related to the development of IG policies. The ICANN
should be praised for the steps it took over the past years to improve its bottom up
process in policy development as well as its openness and engagement with many
stakeholder groups in different regions of the world on issues related to Internet
Governance and policies.
Yet further steps are needed toward the globalization of the ICANN and the IANA
functions. The globalization of the ICANN should include its status to become more of a
global organization. However, more thoughts need to be given to the globalization of the
IANA functions due to its technical nature and its vital role in the security and stability of
the Domain Name System. Future steps taken toward the globalization of the ICANN and
the IANA functions should be evolutionary and should not affect the stability, robustness
and resilience of the Internet.
