Document

Internet Governance: scenarios of uncertainty and mistrust

 

The exhaustion of the current model of Internet Governance is an indisputable fact.

We are experiencing a period of disbelief and loss of credibility in the authorities and in the institutions that control the Internet Governance.

Several were the factors that have compelled us to these scenarios of uncertainty and mistrust, but the main factor of loss of credibility was the observation that, in the context of the Internet Governance, the modi operandi (practices) are different from modi verbali (discourses).  .

Therefore, there is widespread concern due to complaints about the surveillance and espionage industries on the Internet by segments of the international investigative journalism because these industries considered strategic to fight against “terrorism” and the development of policies for cybersecurity under the signature of some countries and in favor also of authoritarian regimes, they are committing crimes against national sovereignty, human rights,  in addition to being highly harmful to freedom of expression and organization.

 

With respect to complaints about espionage, the Brazilian government and the representation of the European Commission issued the following comments:

1. Recent revelations concerning the activities of the global network of electronic espionage have caused indignation and repudiation in public opinion around the world;1

2. Our fundamental freedoms and human rights are not negotiable. They must be protected on line.2

Another concern is the dispute exerted by large telecommunications monopolies by control and privatization of Internet Governance, because these monopolies desire to modify the patterns of Internet use, such as net neutrality, under the argument that their services are no longer to be profitable and that net neutrality delays the possibilities for innovation in the telecommunications industry.

 

The Internet as a common space and public good is under threat, especially when companies violate achievements such as the net neutrality and rights to privacy and free expression of thought.

In this context, the fundamental issues to be discussed should be: firstly, the principles that will ensure the non-violation of human rights; in the second place, the commitment to consolidate, in a perspective post-westfaliana of sovereignty, a multilateral decentralized and inter-operable governance, instituted by all users of this public space, i.e. by governments, by the entrepreneurs of the private sector and the civil society organizations; thirdly, the guarantee of net neutrality, based on ethical and technical criteria,  that can combat restrictions aimed at only the economic interests of some business monopolies.

2.  Roadmaps for the construction of a different model of Internet Governance

 

    Combating all violations of human rights in the cyberspace;
    Consolidation of a decentralized multilateral Internet Governance, inter-operable and truly established in a consensual way with all users of public space: the governments, the entrepreneurs of the private sector and the civil society organizations;
    Guarantee of defense of net neutrality, against the restrictions arising from the economic interests of some monopolies business of telecommunications;
    Construction of mechanisms to prevent the illegal practices of surveillance and espionage of military and private industries in cyberspace;
    Restoration of confidence, the credibility and the tranquility on the cyberspace, from the creative and collective work maintained by representative actors of governments, entrepreneurs of the private sector and civil society organizations.

On the implementation of a different model ofInternet Governance, the Brazilian government and the representation of the European Commission recommended that it should be:

1. Open, multilateral and democratic governance, carried out with transparency by stimulating collective creativity and the participation of society, Governments and the private sector;

2. The Commission firmly supports a real multi-stakeholder governance model for the Internet based on the full involvement of all relevant actors and organizations.

 

1. Access the conference presented by the President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, Dilma Rousseff, the UN General Assembly in September 24, 2013 issued on. In: http://gadebate.un.org/sites/default/files/gastatements/68/BR_en.pdf

2. Check the press release (IP/14/142) addressed the press sent by the European Commission, presented on February 12, 2014:  http://europa.eu/rapid/press net neutrality-release_IP-14-142_en.htm
