Document

Principles of Internet Governance

1.     Full respect for human rights.

2.     Respect for freedom of expression.

3.     Respect for the privacy of individuals and the protection of personal data, avoiding surveillance and collection of personal data in an arbitrarily way and / or contrary to the law, avoiding also supervision by corporations or governments that do not comply with due process.

4.     Respect the rights of consumers and users, promoting a comprehensive framework to enhance consumer protection online.

5.     Internet governance should be based on democratic and multistakeholder processes, where all stakeholders have relevant representation and their views can be taken in consideration, with special attention given to the role of governments, and the need to increase their participation in decision-making processes and in the debates and discussions.

6.      Promote greater transparency in Internet governance.

7.     Promote an information society based on knowledge sharing, preserving the security, stability and continuity of the Internet.

8.     Promote the right to Internet as a techno-cultural tool to enhance personal and social development at the national, regional and global level.

9.     Promote fair and equitable universal access for all, with special emphasis on vulnerable people, girls and women, seniors and people with special needs.

10.  Respect the culture and language diversity, where the Internet should be the platform for creating and sharing content in the preferred language.

11.  Promote the development of a neutral network, avoiding filtering and traffic restrictions.

12.  Promote a responsible use of the Internet, based on education and awareness for the prevention of vulnerabilities and attacks.

13.  Promote balanced geographic representation of all regions in organizations of the ecosystem of Internet Governance, where special attention must be given to gender balance.

14.  Promote cooperation to improve the collection and dissemination of information related to security, promoting also the exchange good practices among all stakeholders.

 

Argentina and Internet Governance

Argentina is actively involved in all areas of debate and participation in Internet Governance: ICANN, IGF, Regional IGF regional, regional meetings of the Latin America and Caribbean Information Society Plan of Action, eLAC, among others.

Argentina believes that a new development of the ecosystem of Internet Governance should be achieved through the strengthening of existing structures based on the multi-stakeholder model where all stakeholders are equally represented, including governments, from all the regions and considering gender balance.

Argentina supports the multi-stakeholder model for the Internet governance and recognizes the value of involving all stakeholders, with special attention given to their respective roles.

Argentina recognizes that Internet governance is more than the allocation of domain names and IP addresses. It includes also aspects of public policy, as expressed in paragraph 58 of the Tunis Agenda adopted by WSIS, highlighting that the responsibility of the definition of these policies rests within the States and this is an inalienable right.

Therefore, it is understood that the current ecosystem of Internet governance must evolve towards a more balanced model that guarantees the participation of all parties on an equal footing, in particular the least developed countries, taking into consideration the current and future Internet.

In this scenario, governements play a critical role in Internetr governance and efforts must be made to increase their participation in the decision-making processes and in the debates and discussions.

Argentina recognizes the need for a greater cooperation, to enable governments, on an equal footing, play their role and responsibilities in international public policy issues pertaining to the Internet.

 

Roadmap for the future development of the Internet Governance ecosystem

Strengthen the organizations of the Internet ecosystem (I* Organizations) through increasing the participation of all relevant stakeholders from all regions, including governments and taking into account gender balance.

In particular, the following recommendations are made:

 

On the Internationalization of ICANN:

Promote the internationalization of ICANN, through a deep revision of the current structure.

Achieve relevant and active representation from all regions and all actors in the ICANN structure, including representatives of governments on an equal footing, taking into account gender balance. These principles should be specially considered in the following Advisor Commitees and Supporting Organizations: 

• The ICANN board

• The Security and Stability Advisor Committee (SSAC)

• The Generic Names Supporting Organization (GNSO)

 

Governmental Advisory Committee GAC :

Promote the participation of as many countries as possible, especially developing countries.

Promote the rotation of all the regions in the GAC chair and vice roles, creating five permanent vice-chairs, one from each region, elected by consensus, within each region.

Take in consideration the suggested changes made by the GAC restructuring working group specially formed, led by Spain where Argentina has participated.

 

IANA-  RIRs - ISOC – IETF

Strengthen the structure of IANA and the RIRs through the relevant participation of representatives of all stakeholders including representatives of governments, universities, civil society and private sector, who should be all involved in the decision making process related to related to critical Internet resources.

Promote relevant and ongoing participation of experts of all regions in decision-making spaces of the Internet Society and the Internet Engineering Task Force.

There is sufficient experience and trained professionals in all regions of the world, even in countries with a lower degree of relative development, to be considered as suitable candidates for general participation and for leadership positions in these organizations, including board of directors.

There should be gender balance in the board of directors and leadership positions in these organizations, there are enough women professionals perfectly able to be considered as good candidates for these positions.

  

Internet Governance Forum:

Strengthen the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), as the main global forum where Internet Governance is debated, where all stakeholders participate on an equal footing.

Strenghthen the mechanisms to promote the participation of all stakeholders from developing countries in the Internet Governance Forum (IGF).