Content submission by the Federal Government of Mexico
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Karel Elizabeth Ochoa Reyes
Region: Mexico
Organization: Secretara de Comunicaciones y Transportes
Sector: Government
Keywords: Social and economic development, multistakeholder, improved
environment of the Internet, mutual cooperation
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
We are convinced Internet is a powerful means through which nations can reach targets
of social and economic development. As stated in Mexico?s National Digital Strategy
presented by the President of Mexico, Enrique Pea Nieto, empirical evidence has shown
that the adoption of ICT positively impacts GDP growth, job creation, productivity,
innovation, quality of life of the population, equality, transparency and efficiency in the
provision of utilities. ICT changed the way people reportedly communicates sports, do
business, work and study, and therefore have become the element that has contributed to
the development of societies that have managed to incorporate and use them in their
activities every day. This has been reflected in the recent telecommunications amendment
approved by the Mexican Congress, where establish that, the State shallguarantee the
right of access to ICT, as well as broadcasting and telecoms access including broadband
and Internet access, for all Mexican citi
Document
Content submission by the Federal Government of Mexico
We are convinced Internet is a powerful means through which nations can reach targets
of social and economic development. As stated in Mexico’s National Digital Strategy
presented by the President of Mexico, Enrique Peña Nieto, empirical evidence has shown
that the adoption of ICT positively impacts GDP growth, job creation, productivity,
innovation, quality of life of the population, equality, transparency and efficiency in the
provision of utilities. The global adoption of mobile telephony and the rapid growth of
broadband, have promoted the flow of ideas and goods in a global environment. ICT
changed the way people reportedly communicates sports, do business, work and study,
and therefore have become the element that has contributed to the development of
societies that have managed to incorporate and use them in their activities every day.
This has been reflected in the recent telecommunication´s amendment approved by the
Mexican Congress, where establish that, the State shall guarantee the right of access to
ICT, as well as broadcasting and telecommunications access including broadband and
Internet access, for all Mexican citizens.
In this sense, we appreciate the effort and initiative of the Brazilian Federal Government
to organize the “Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of the Internet
Governance” taking into account that digital natives are increasing around the world
where an improved environment of the Internet ecosystem is required. We emphasize the
importance of maintaining a multi-stakeholder model of decision making when it comes to
internet governance, as we recognize that the entire Internet community must continue
working together if we want the Internet to remain an open, vibrant platform for innovation,
growth, and the free exchange of ideas, and if we want to expand the reach of this
technology to those who remain unconnected.
Considering the context of the topics that are being discussed during the meeting, we
submit the following contribution.
Internet Governance Principles
The Mexican Government has participated in numerous international fora in which the
principles related to the Information Society and the Internet has been main subjects.
Furthermore we consider that many of these principles are currently in force and some
new elements could be added to them.
In general, the Mexican Government is looking to keep the main concepts that are
contained in our national legal and policy framework, as well as international treaties of
which Mexico is a signatory:
1. Wide protection of Human Rights in the digital era
2. Non-discriminatory and inclusive access to the Internet
3. Guarantee the right of access to public information, open data and freedom
expression as well as the right for data protection and privacy
4. Promote effective competition in telecommunications and ICT services and
promote anti-trust policies and regulations.
5. Strengthen the integration to the Information Society to guarantee equal access to
information, education and opportunities for the digital world
6. Consider telecommunications, including broadband and Internet, as a worldwide
public service of general interest.
7. Social responsibility of the public, social and private sectors in favor of using
Internet for economic and social development.
8. Multi-stakeholder participation according to the procedures of popular involvement
and consultation in equal basis for all parties involved in the Internet Governance process.
9. Protecting consumers, promote trust in the Internet environment and encourage
users to organize themselves for a better care of their interest.
10. Promote the development and innovation on Internet infrastructure and related
services through appropriate public policies; strengthen the national and global digital
economy in benefit of all citizens.
11. Given the special role of governments in areas such as national security and critical
infrastructure stability, they should be active participants in multi stakeholder process.
12. We continue endorsing the Declaration of Principles Building the Information
Society: a global challenge in the new Millennium adopted by the World Summit on the
Information Society and the OECD Principles for Internet Policy-making and we are
convinced that this principles are good bases to be adopted as part of Internet
Governance Principles.
Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
The Internet Governance Forum (IGF) established by the United Nations according with
the Tunis Agenda and the corresponding Resolutions of their General Assembly,
represent a substantial element to analyze the current status of the global ecosystem. We
identify the following key elements which can be improved through mutual cooperation.
1. IGF shall be the main forum where all stakeholders can participate and disseminate
good practices and lessons learned. Similar efforts at regional and national levels should
be a recommendation. In this sense, we encourage the UN to renew the IGF mandate for
another 10 years, in addition to the permanent evolution and continuity of the
Multistakeholder Advisory Group (MAG), in recognition of the thorough, objective and
inclusive representation of the wide diversity of stakeholders involved on the Internet.
2. Continued compliance with the United Nations System and monitoring of emerging
issues where a global public policy could be identification of appropriate bodies to handle
each matter, and improvement of the measures to facilitate the multi-stakeholder
involvement.
3. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) should evolve
to comprise a more internationalized organization under the most suitable regime for multistakeholder
participation, on the basis of equality, openness, bottom-up and rough
consensus, on the understanding that the proper application of these within the
organizational structures will avoid control by any particular stakeholder. The same should
be endorsed for the internationalization of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
(IANA) functions currently under ICANN administration by contract with the US
Department of Commerce (US DoC). As Internet policy discussions become more global
in nature, stakeholders should continue to rely on the existing structures to develop global
policies that benefit all users rather than relying on either the creation of another
governance body or on multilateral means.
4. All of the stakeholders involved should increase their accountability and transparency
practices in favor of the global Internet community public interest. Recognizing necessary
improvements within the current governance model, we propose bringing new
stakeholders whose voices may not be effectively heard into the conversation. For
example, through the offer of fellowships to engineers and policymakers from the
developing world to attend multi-stakeholder meetings, as well as improving transparency
and accountability, calling on all involved organizations to make relevant governance and
policy documents available to all stakeholders at no cost and opening governance
meetings to equal participation whenever possible.
5. International organizations and governments should enhance their cooperation in
order to mitigate any conduct contrary to the use of the Internet for the economic and
social development, taking into account the potential for improvements in the international
mechanisms of cooperation among stakeholders. In addition, considering that in some
cases of Internet Governance, private mechanisms aimed at specific expertise areas and
non-State forms of cooperation are currently undergoing and working properly among the
stakeholders involved, we recommend that these should be recognized, endorsed, and
not duplicated within other State cooperation mechanisms in order to avoid effort
duplication and regulation spheres.
6. The technical community and International Organizations should continue improving
their mutual cooperation for the elaboration of the standards in favor of the
interoperability, security and stability of the Internet. We encourage the internet
governance community to maintain and endorse the Internet Governance Principles
defined by the Technical Community,[1] as follows:
a. Open and inclusive participation.
b. Consensus-based.
c. Permission-less innovation.
d. Collective stewardship and empowerment.
e. Transparency.
f. Pragmatic and evidence-based approach.
g. Voluntary adoption.
Promote the development of effective policies and mechanisms to tackle the massive
unsolicited communications (spam) and threats of hacking and cybercrime.
[1] Internet Collaboration Group (2014). Available at:
http://www.internetcollaboration.org/ig-recommendations-itcg/