Global Cooperation in Cyberspace
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Bruce W. McConnell
Region: United States of America
Organization: EastWest Institute
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: transparent, accountable, orderly, inclusive, agile,
Abstract
To address growing political, economic, and security concerns that threaten the future of
cyberpace, support is needed for the design and testing of transparent, accountable,
orderly, inclusive, agile, and effective management and governance structures that
increase predictability and trustworthiness. Existing multi-lateral and multi-stakeholder
institutions must be strengthened, and their legitimacy enhanced. In some areas, new
institutions may be needed.
Document
SUBMISSION OF THE EASTWEST INSTITUTE TO THE GLOBAL
MULTISTAKEHOLDER MEETING ON THE FUTURE OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE
08 MARCH 2014
Global Cooperation in Cyberspace
“Cyberspace is the future of the human race.”
Zhang Li, Director, Chinese Center for Contemporary International Relations
The
Challenge
Global economic growth and political stability are increasingly endangered by national
barriers to the secure flow of information products and services. This development is
being driven by three influences:
· Political and Economic Concerns. Trade protection, concerns about online content
that can lead to domestic instability, and anger about surveillance create political pressure
for “localization.”
· Security Concerns. Cyber attackers increasingly menace the delivery of lifesustaining
essential services, international cyber criminals go unpunished, and a cyber
arms race threatens stability.
· Weak Governance. The national and international cyberspace governance
institutions that are needed to successfully address these concerns are slow, weak,
isolated, or non-existent.
If these three influences are not successfully managed, a militarized, fragmented
“Splinternet” will emerge to threaten global economic growth and fuel dangerous regional
and international instability. Moreover, these interrelated influences cannot be managed
separately. Because the network connects everywhere, true security in cyberspace will
require the participation across governments, including many in the developing world.
Private sector ICT operators and suppliers, national and international non-governmental
organizations, and the netizens themselves must also participate in shaping a common
future.
Progress is urgently needed in the near term – every month that passes without action
raises the costs to society of the current trends, and of turning those trends around.
Without effective action, the future safety and livelihoods of literally billions of young, new
Internet users will be substantially degraded, increasing pressure on already fragile states.
The
Opportunity
The Splinternet is an internet whose capacity and effectiveness are weakened by barriers
to efficient information transfer, threats to personal and public security, and unresolved
conflicts around norms. Institutions, processes, and policies must be developed that will
reduce the pressures driving fragmentation and minimize its negative consequences. A
broad initiative is needed that will convene and mobilize government and private
stakeholders around three objectives that match the three influences driving
fragmentation.
1. Economic and Political Maturity: Promote trade in secure products and services,
encourage the flow of information to support education and innovation, and
encourage limits on cyber surveillance to enhance privacy and human rights.
2. Security and Stability: Work to mitigate cyber risks to critical infrastructure,
streamline mutual law enforcement assistance in cyber-enabled crime, and promote
measures of restraint in cyber weapons development and deployment.
3. Sound Governance: Support the design and testing of transparent, accountable,
orderly, inclusive, agile, and effective management and governance structures that
increase predictability and trustworthiness in cyberspace. Existing multi-lateral and
multi-stakeholder institutions must be strengthened and their legitimacy enhanced.
In some areas, new institutions may be needed.
Relevance to NETmundial
The Global Multistakeholder meeting on the Future of Internet Governance takes as a
dual starting point the broad base of existing principles and the small set of existing
Internet governance institutions. The EastWest Institute is contributing to the discussion
by providing a larger context for consideration of the longer-term future of cyberspace, a
scope of conversation that includes, but goes well beyond, the current remits of ICANN,
the IETF, the ITU, and other organizations. We believe that the moment is ripe to take on
this larger set of issues over the next several years and arrive collectively at a set of multistakeholder
institutions that comprise a sustainable regime for governing cyberspace in
the long-term interests of humanity and of the planet.
# # #