Document

Submission of Internet Governance Principles

 

 

Abstract:

Our Association support the multi-stakeholder model approach to promote the progress of Internet and its governance. The making policy and the way to govern the internet should be open to all interested individuals, communities and organizations without any prejudice and without favor and should be inclusive to make process.

Mainbody text:

 

    Internet governance should be open to all the people not only who use and are interested in now , but also will use and will be interested in the future. And of course it should be based on multi-stakeholder, bottom-up and consensus-making process.
    Transparent, accountable, inclusive and meaningful participationAll stakeholders have the right to know/understand the reason of the decisions and its process. And the system (open to all stakeholders) to oversee the decision making process will help to reflect the opinions and increase transparency. The accountable system will produce the meaningful participation without unproductiveness.
    Respect for Human Rights:Human rights is the most important issue of Internet Governance. In the similar context, the privacy and the Freedom of Expression should be considered as the same importance. Freedom of communication is a fundamental right.
    Respect for Diversity In the progress of Internet Governance, those matters should be deliberate, balance of gender, locality, Nationality, religion, species, class and so on. And also we should consider the linguistic diversity. As we have new gTLD program will make a chance to non-English community to use its own language. IDN(Internationalized Domain Name) program is one of the good practice, although it has many agendas.

 

Submission on Internet Governance ecosystem and roadmapAbstract:

We agree with the spirits of the Montevideo Statement on the Future of Internet Cooperation. The outreach efforts to promote the Internet Governance attitude should be more activated for the better understanding and participations.

Main body text:

    We support the spirit of the Montevideo Statement.Global multi-stakeholder cooperation will enhance the evolution of Internet Governance challenges. The enhancement of ICANN and IANA function will be one of the most important issues. And more participation in this field should be needed.   It is important to make it open and inclusive for policy making of Internet Critical Resources. These frameworks should be strengthened by involving more stakeholders.In order to reach global consensus on new oversight and policy development framework on ICANN/IANA functions, we suggest to set up Working Groups consist of all stakeholders with geographic, gender and other diversity considerations to come up with possible alternatives to be considered at the coming IGF 2015 process.
    The outreach effort of Internet Governance should be expanded. For instance, marginal people and/or communities should be supported by the appropriate institutions, financially and technically to provide the developing policy of Internet Governance. This will help not only the marginals but also the existing organizations, communities and individuals to promote the better understanding and evolving the Internet governance.
    Local/Global Dialog and Best practice share:The continuous, local and global dialog on Internet Governance will be effective to make a consensus of Internet Governance. These dialogs should be open to all stakeholders and disclosed. Especially the institutional activities about Critical Internet Resources should be transparent and fare. The sharing the experiences with all stakeholders will strongly promote the evolution of Internet Governance.
    Capacity building and Support: To achieve the goal of Internet Governance policy making, not only financial support but human support will need for developing and heightening the international momentum toward comprehension and engagement of Internet Governance Internationally.
