IIS Contribution on Internet governance principles
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Izumi Aizu
Region: Japan
Organization: Institute for InfoSocinomics, Tama Univ.
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: multi-stakeholder, local, national, global, inclusive
Abstract
We support a multi-stakeholder, bottom-up, consensus-based approach to Internet
governance. Internet governance processes should be open and inclusive. These
principles should be applied to all levels of Internet Governance: local, national, regional
and global.
Document
IIS Contribution on Internet governance principles
Izumi Aizu
Senior Research Fellow, Institute for InfoSocinomics, Tama University
Japan
Abstract:
We support a multi-stakeholder, bottom-up, consensus-based approach to Internet
governance. Internet governance processes should be open and inclusive. These
principles should be applied to all levels of Internet Governance: local, national, regional
and global.
Key words:
multi-stakeholder, local, national, global, open, inclusive
Overall Principles
1. Internet governance should be based on multi-stakeholder, bottom-up and consensusmaking
process. By "multi-stakeholder" we mean government, civil society, private sector
and technical community are given equal footing in shaping the policy and governance
mechanisms of the essential functionalities of the Internet. They need to evolve over time
as the technology and society undergo changes.
Local, national and regional governance mechanisms should be exercised reflecting the
global principles, but specific context and environments pertinent to each locale should
also be kept and respected.
Principles for process and participation
2. Transparent, accountable, inclusive, enabling meaningful participation.
• Transparent: it should be easy to understand how decisions are made, processes
should be clearly documented and follow agreed procedures. Decision-making should
reflect how inputs are taken into account and should be reflected in outcomes.
Full disclosure of the institutional activities including the financial and other important
records of the governing bodies must be maintained.
• Accountable: mechanisms for checks and balance should exist; it should be possible for
any stakeholder to be able to challenge decisions.
• Inclusive: Internet governance institutions and processes should be inclusive and open
to all interested stakeholders. Processes should be bottom-up enabling the full
involvement of all stakeholders, from agenda setting to representation in final decisions.
Capacity building activities should be implemented as an essential part of ensuring the
inclusiveness.
• Meaningful participation: Anyone affected by an Internet governance process should be
able to participate in that process. Particularly, Internet governance institutions and
processes should strengthen outreach activities to wider members of the society, support
capacity building for newcomers, especially stakeholders from developing countries and
under represented groups. Practical measures to address the needs of non-English
speakers and those who do not speak the six UN languages should also be implemented.
Principles for the architecture and operation of the Internet
3. We support the Internet's distributed and open architecture, based on open standards
and protocols developed through collaborative, open processes, and principles of
interoperability and the ability to connect.
Respect and support for human rights
4. Human rights should be central values of any Internet governance principles. Human
rights should be equal online and offline. Internet governance should support the free
flow of information as well as freedom of expression at all levels. People should be able
to expect that their right to privacy enjoyed offline are also respected online.
Respect for diversity
5. Cultural, linguistic, and social diversity (e.g. gender, age, persons with disabilities)
should be fully respected both in the outcomes as well as decision-making processes at
the Internet Governance institutions.
Promote competition and choice
6. We recognize the need to keep the uniqueness of the critical Internet identifiers such as
Domain Name and IP Addresses requires some kind of monopolistic management at the
top level. However, healthy competition that provides the choices for end users should
also be promoted as they form essential part of modern society and economy. Measures
safeguarding public interest and fair competition and prevent discriminatory behaviors of
the monopolies must be implemented at all levels: local, national, regional and global.
Independent and transparent oversight mechanisms should be placed over these
monopolistic operations.
