Internet Governance Principles: Securing the Future of the
Internet
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Robert Mureithi Njathika
Region: Kenya, Africa
Organization: CIPIT
Sector: Academia
Keywords: Internet Governance Principles
Abstract
When the fathers of the internet came up with the world wide web, they conceived a web
architecture which is free and open. Therefore, as the world meets in Brazil to discuss the
future of the internet it must bear in mind this facts and reflect upon the visions of the
founders. That said, we must also be cognisant of the present day dynamics and
challenges which force us to consider a set of internet governance principles. The mere
mention of 'internet governance principles' does send alarm bells in to some quarters who
see this as a mechanism in which nation states are seeking to take away the internet from
the population. Therefore, it is with this in mind that I try and look at the existing
governance principles which have been written and agreed upon in the last few years
before the current storm brought about by Edward Snowden revelations. We wish to see a
united approach in securing the future of the internet by agreeing on a set of internet
governance principles.
Document
As noted in the Deauville G8 Declaration the internet has become essential to our
societies and as such we envision a universal internet which embodies the principles as
advocated by Brazilian President HE Dilma Rousseff in the 68 session of the United
Nations General Assembly. In her speech to the assembly she addressed the following;
Creation of multilateral mechanism for the world wide network capable of ensuring
principles such as; 1. Freedom of expression, privacy of the individual and respect of the
human rights. 2. Open, multilateral and democratic governance, carried out with
transparency by stimulating collective creativity and the participation of society,
governments and private sector. 3 Universality that ensures the social and human
development and the construction of inclusive and non-discriminatory societies. 4.
Cultural diversity, without the imposition of beliefs, customs and values. 5. Neutrality of
the network, guided only by technical and ethical criteria, rendering it inadmissible to
restrict it for commercial, religious or any other purposes.
The creation of a multilateral mechanism would see to it that the present day institutions
such as ICANN are reforrmed to meet the concerns raised by president Dilma.
Touching on the Principles we would wish to see discussed in the Global Stakeholder
meeting. We would wish to see the issues of Human Rights enjoyed by netzens
addressed. This is in light of state centric developments where freedoms and rights of
individuals online are sacrificed at the behest of 'national security' concerns. Under this
we recognise the Brazilian Internet steering committee's principles for the governance and
use of the internet - Freedom, Privancy and Human Rights. Which is driven by the
principles of expression, individual privacy and the respect of human rights, recognising
them as essential to the preservation of a fair and democratic society. This is in light of the
Edward Snowden revelations on the National Security Agency spying activities.
Universality of the internet
Certain stakeholders have been looking for avenues of bypassing the United States in a
new internet artchitecture so as to prevent spying by United States but doing so would
interfear with the Universality of the internet as we know it today. Hence, the global
stakehoder meeting must come up with a way forward on the current universality of the
internet taking on board the concerns of routing traffic through USA. This has been
efficiently put forth by the European Union Vice-President Neelie Kroes;
We should safeguard the idea that, on the internet, every node can communicate with
every other. This unity is what allows the internet to thrive in the way it has; we need to
avoid fragmentation. - Neelie Kroes, European Union Vice-President
Security of the internet /Security on the internet
Cybersecurity is the one of the problems of our time. A number of convention have come
to play with the Convention of Europe being the most predominan one while from the part
of the world I hail from, the African Union is currently in the last stages finalising the draft
African Union Cybersecurity Convention. All this are as a result of real concerns on
security on the internet. This is bound to become more complicated as we enter into the
era of 'internet of things'.
The conversations around this realm have been instituted and revolve around the states
level. however, there is need to broadedn these conversations to the non-state actors.