Committing to the Principle of Openness
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Raquel Gatto
Region: Global
Organization: Internet Society (ISOC)
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: Openness; Open Standards; Cooperation; Voluntary Adoption;
Free flow of information
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 2
Abstract
For more than 20 years, the Internet Society has been committed to promoting the open
development, evolution, and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the
world. In this regard, the Internet Society considers openness as a core principle and the
underlying foundation for the fulfillment, enjoyment and sustainability of the Internet?s
social, political and economic potential.
Document
Introduction
The Internet Society appreciates the opportunity to provide input for consideration by the
participants in the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance
(“NETmundial”).
We understand that the meeting will seek to put forward a set of recommended principles
on Internet governance. In this regard, the Internet Society considers openness as a core
principle and the underlying foundation for the fulfillment, enjoyment and sustainability of
the Internet’s social, political and economic potential.
Openness is additionally reflected in the following principles[1] articulated by a set of
Internet standard-setting organizations:
· Cooperation among standards organizations;
· Adherence to due process, broad consensus, transparency, balance and openness
in standards development;
· Commitment to technical merit, interoperability, competition, innovation and benefit
to humanity;
· Availability of standards to all; and
· Voluntary adoption.
Underlying these principles is the value openness has created for the Internet (and
beyond). Internet standards have to be open to be useable. Openness allows the rapid
development of the Internet and the various applications running on it; it has resulted in
unprecedented economic growth, social transformation, technological innovation and
creativity.
The Virtuous Circle of an Open Internet
Openness has allowed the technical, economic, societal and political dimensions of the
Internet to come closer together. For instance, open global standards provide a platform
for borderless trade and an interoperable open economy, fostering innovation; innovation,
in turn, relies on users’ ability to freely and openly create, share information and exchange
ideas, reflecting the model of a healthy open society; finally, open multistakeholder
models have proven key in terms of economic development and capacity building.
In the absence of open, global standards for interoperation, fragmented and incompatible
networks are likely. Open standards are accessible to all developers and permit the
creation of affordable networks and services, through competition. The desire to create an
open and efficient system of communication has driven the creation of the Internet we see
today.
Openness can also enhance individuals’ freedom, allowing people to connect and craft
together technical and social change through a participatory and consensus-driven
process. From its early days, the Internet has evolved by empowering users and
communities.
Final remarks
These manifestations of openness, however, require constant commitment and reexamination
of core values to remain relevant and effective. The NETMundial meeting
could be one of the spaces that contribute towards this commitment.
For more than 20 years, the Internet Society has been committed “to promote the open
development, evolution, and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the
world”.[2]
To this end, the Internet Society considers openness a key principle. It is because of
openness that the need to adhere to other principles including, but not limited to,
transparency, accountability, cooperation, inclusiveness, proportionality and the rule of
law and due process becomes even more pertinent. Openness encapsulates the essence
of the Internet – from its technical evolution to its contribution to societies and economies.
[1]http://www.internetsociety.org/who-we-are/mission
[2] http://open-stand.org/principles/