Open Stand: Modern Paradigm for the Global Standards
Development Principles
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Raquel Gatto
Region: Global
Organization: Internet Society (ISOC)
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: Open Standards; Collaboration; Transparency; Innovation;
Principles.
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
The shared OpenStand principles grew from the collective experience of standardization
processes that have made the Internet and the World Wide Web today?s premiere
platforms for innovation and borderless commerce. The effectiveness and efficiency of
these principles and the modern paradigm for standards are proven by their ability to
foster competition and cooperation, support innovation and interoperability and drive
market success. The OpenStand principles encapsulate that successful standardization
model and make it extendable across the contemporary, global economy?s gamut of
technologies and markets. The principles comprise a modern paradigm in which the
economics of global markets?fueled by technological innovation?drive global deployment
of standards, regardless of their formal status within traditional bodies of national
representation.
Document
Introduction
In 2012, five leading global Internet standards organizations, namely IAB, IEEE, ISOC,
IETF and W3C announced their agreement on jointly developed principles establishing a
modern paradigm for standards. The shared OpenStand principles grew from their
collective experience of standardization processes that have made the Internet and the
World Wide Web today’s premiere platforms for innovation and borderless commerce.
The effectiveness and efficiency of these principles and the modern paradigm for
standards are proven by their ability to foster competition and cooperation, support
innovation and interoperability and drive market success.
The OpenStand principles encapsulate that successful standardization model and make it
extendable across the contemporary, global economy’s gamut of technologies and
markets. The principles comprise a modern paradigm in which the economics of global
markets—fueled by technological innovation—drive global deployment of standards,
regardless of their formal status within traditional bodies of national representation.
Since the statement was announced, hundreds of organizations, individuals and firms
have formally endorsed or expressed their support for the OpenStand principles.
http://open-stand.org/
Principles of the Modern Paradigm for Global Standards Development
1. Cooperation. Respectful cooperation between standards organizations, whereby each
respects the autonomy, integrity, processes, and intellectual property rules of the others.
2. Adherence to principles. Adherence to the five fundamental principles of standards
development:
Due process. Decisions are made with equity and fairness among
participants. No one party dominates or guides standards development.
Standards processes are transparent and opportunities exist to appeal
decisions. Processes for periodic standards review and updating are well
defined.
Broad consensus. Processes allow for all views to be considered and
addressed, such that agreement can be found across a range of interests.
Transparency. Standards organizations provide advance public notice of
proposed standards development activities, the scope of work to be
undertaken, and conditions for participation. Easily accessible records of
decisions and the materials used in reaching those decisions are provided.
Public comment periods are provided before final standards approval and
adoption.
Balance. Standards activities are not exclusively dominated by any
particular person, company or interest group.
Openness. Standards processes are open to all interested and informed
parties.
3. Collective empowerment. Commitment by affirming standards organizations and their
participants to collective empowerment by striving for standards that:
are chosen and defined based on technical merit, as judged by the
contributed expertise of each participant;
provide global interoperability, scalability, stability, and resiliency;
enable global competition;
serve as building blocks for further innovation; and
contribute to the creation of global communities, benefiting humanity.
4. Availability. Standards specifications are made accessible to all for implementation
and deployment. Affirming standards organizations have defined procedures to develop
specifications that can be implemented under fair terms. Given market diversity, fair terms
may vary from royalty-free to fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory terms (FRAND).
5. Voluntary adoption. Standards are voluntarily adopted and success is determined by
the market.