As per disseminated in the OpenStand movement (www.openstand.org), the Modern
Paradigm for Global Standards Development is shaped by adherence to the following five
principles:
1. Cooperation. Respectful cooperation between standards organizations, whereby each
respects the autonomy, integrity, processes, and intellectual property rules of the others.
2. Adherence to principles. Adherence to the five fundamental principles of
standards development:
• Due process. Decisions are made with equity and fairness among participants. No
one party dominates or guides standards development. Standards processes are
transparent and opportunities exist to appeal decisions. Processes for periodic
standards review and updating are well defined.
• Broad consensus. Processes allow for all views to be considered and addressed,
such that agreement can be found across a range of interests.
• Transparency. Standards organizations provide advance public notice of proposed
standards development activities, the scope of work to be undertaken, and conditions
for participation. Easily accessible records of decisions and the materials used in
reaching those decisions are provided. Public comment periods are provided before
final standards approval and adoption.
• Balance. Standards activities are not exclusively dominated by any particular
person, company or interest group.
• Openness. Standards processes are open to all interested and informed parties.
3. Collective empowerment. Commitment by affirming standards organizations and
their participants to collective empowerment by striving for standards that:
• are chosen and defined based on technical merit, as judged by the contributed
expertise of each participant;
• provide global interoperability, scalability, stability, and resiliency;
• enable global competition;
• serve as building blocks for further innovation; and
• contribute to the creation of global communities, benefiting humanity.
4. Availability. Standards specifications are made accessible to all for implementation and
deployment. Affirming standards organizations have defined procedures to develop
specifications that can be implemented under fair terms. Given market diversity, fair terms
may vary from royalty-free to fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory terms (FRAND).
5. Voluntary adoption. Standards are voluntarily adopted and success is determined by
the market.
Internet Society
Galerie Jean-Malbuisson, 15
CH-1204 Geneva
Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 807 1444
Fax: +41 22 807 1445
www.internetsociety.org
1775 Wiehle Avenue
Suite 201
Reston, VA 20190
USA
Tel: +1 703 439 2120
Fax: +1 703 326 9881
Email: info@isoc.org