Internet Ecosystem: Naming and addressing, shared global
services and operations, and open standards development.
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Raquel Gatto
Region: Global
Organization: Internet Society (ISOC)
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: Internet Governance; Internet Ecosystem; Collaboration;
Openness; Multistakeholder
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 2
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 3
Abstract
This paper offers a brief introduction to some of the Internet organizations and processes
that shape naming and addressing, shared global services and operations, and open
standards development in the Internet ecosystem. It looks at many of the key
organizations and processes that shape Internet policy, with a focus on how any
interested stakeholder can get involved in their work. It is not exhaustive; nor does it cover
all aspects in detail. It is recommended that readers use this document as a starting point
in their exploration of the Internet ecosystem, its players and policy processes. Extensive
hyperlinked references are provided throughout to assist anyone seeking deeper
understanding or involvement.Please look at the Full Paper here:
http://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/files/bp_Internet%20Ecosystem_020514_en.pdf
Document
(FULL VERSION OF THIS PAPER IS ATTACHED)
Introduction
This paper offers a brief introduction to some of the Internet organizations and processes
that shape naming and addressing, shared global services and operations, and open
standards development in the Internet ecosystem. It builds on the Internet Society’s wellreceived
graphic: The Internet Ecosystem:
http://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/files/bp_Internet%20Ecosystem_020514_en.pdf
This paper looks at many of the key organizations and processes that shape Internet
policy, with a focus on how any interested stakeholder can get involved in their work. It is
not exhaustive; nor does it cover all aspects in detail. It is recommended that readers use
this document as a starting point in their exploration of the Internet ecosystem, its players
and policy processes. Extensive hyperlinked references are provided throughout to assist
anyone seeking deeper understanding or involvement.
As a discussion paper, “Exploring the Internet Ecosystem” will remain a work in progress.
Readers who wish to suggest improvements are invited to send suggestions to the
Internet Society at isoc@isoc.org.
The importance of Participation
A diverse set of players has shaped the Internet and continues to contribute to its future
success. Yet the Internet is not a static thing. Since it was established as a research
network more than 40 years ago, it has evolved from a small government-run network of
researchers to a network of networks that is the cornerstone for the global economy and
an indispensable tool for individuals worldwide.
These phenomenal changes pose significant challenges for policy processes and actors
in the Internet policy field. The organizations and processes that shape Internet policy
have proven to be resilient and adaptable in large part because they have assumed that
change is a constant and because they recognize that the best solutions to new issues
that arise stem from willing collaboration between informed stakeholders.
The Internet Society encourages all stakeholders to become involved in the policy and
standardization processes that support the ongoing evolution of the Internet and the
equally evolving management of Internet resources.
Within the Internet ecosystem, various organizations have responsibilities for the
protocols and standards that enable basic end-to-end communications (such as the
Internet Protocol); the resources that direct these communications (such as IP addresses
and the Domain Name System); the provision of reliable connectivity that ensures the
communications reach their intended destinations, thus linking end-users (such as global
telecommunication, satellite and cable system operators, Internet Exchange Points, etc.);
and the policies, frameworks and educational activities necessary to ensure the Internet’s
openness, continuity and flexibility.
These technologies, resources and services are all highly interdependent and require a
significant amount of coordination. The organizations responsible for standardization,
coordination, administration and day-to-day management in the Internet sphere include
the IETF, ICANN, the IANA function, the RIRs, and many others that will be touched upon
in this paper. Each organization has a specific role and provides fundamental value to the
overall functioning of the Internet.
These organizations have a proven, long-standing relationship with one another in
coordinating the technical infrastructure of the Internet and have contributed to its
incredible growth and stability. They make use of well-established mechanisms, including
open, public meetings, mailing lists and bottom-up policy development processes that
enable direct participation by any interested party. This way of working ensures that
policies are defined by those who require them for their operations. It also gives the
system the flexibility to respond and adapt to the Internet’s rapidly evolving technology
and to the changing needs of the Internet community. It has resulted in the creation of a
significant body of knowledge and experience in the successful administration and
management of the technologies, resources and services that make the Internet the
success it is today.
The development, governance and coordination of the Internet result from discussions,
debates and policy development processes in many specialized forums. Active
participation by end users, governments, business, civil society and technical experts
(whether as individuals or organizational representatives) is essential to make the
policies, approve the procedures and write the standards, etc., that make the Internet the
efficient and effective system it is today.
The Internet Society is pleased to offer this guide to the Internet stakeholders, their policy
processes and participation mechanisms related to naming and addressing, shared global
services and operations and open standards development within the Internet Ecosystem.
It is hoped that this paper helps encourage and facilitate participation in these important
areas of Internet policy development.
The Internet Ecosystem
Figure 1. Internet Ecosystem (attached)
Internet ecosystem is the term used to describe the organizations and communities that
have organically evolved to guide the operation and development of the technologies and
infrastructure that comprise the global Internet. These organizations share common
values and a shared commitment to the open development of the Internet.
The term Internet ecosystem implies a Darwinian evolution focusing on the rapid and
continued development and adoption of Internet technologies and which is characterized
by the involvement of a broad range of actors; open, transparent, and collaborative
processes; and the use of products and infrastructure with dispersed ownership and
control.
Organizations that comprise the Internet Ecosystem include:
Technical standards bodies such as the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF), the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), and the Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE)
Organizations that manage resources for global naming and addressing
capabilities such as the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN), including its operation of the Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority (IANA) function, Regional Internet Registries (RIR),
and Doman Name Registries and Registrars
Companies that provide network infrastructure services such as Domain
Name Service (DNS) providers, network operators, cloud and content
delivery network providers, and Internet Exchange Points (IXPs)
Individuals and Organizations that use the Internet to communicate with
each other and offer services and applications, or develop content, and
Organizations that provide education and build capacity for developing
and using Internet technologies, such as multilateral organizations,
educational institutions, and governmental agencies.
This paper looks at each component of the Internet ecosystem in turn.