COAI Proposal - NETmundial-Global Multistakeholder
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Vikram Tiwathia
Region: India
Organization: COAI
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: COAI, multi-stakeholder, internet governance, mobile
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
The Internet in India has only taken 3 years to grow from a subscribers? base of 100
million to 200 million. Mobile Internet is going to be the game changer for Internet in India.
Multi-stakeholder or multi-lateral - two words encapsulating diametrically opposite views
on internet governance stands at the heart of a raging debate across the globe. COAI,
which represents the largest industry association and serves nearly 800 million mobile
subscribers, believes policies that shape the Internet impact not only the development of
the technologies themselves, but also the realization of internationally agreed human
rights, social equity and interdependence, cultural concerns, and both social and
economic development. Our vision is that Internet governance should be inclusive, people
centered and development oriented. Any policy framework for the Internet must support
openness and connectivity.
Document
NETmundial-Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance
23-24th April, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
COAI Proposal
A. Internet Governance
1. The phenomenal growth of the Internet has facilitated individual empowerment and
access to information, goods and services across borders; it has lowered entry
barriers and supported the rapid development of small and medium sized
enterprises; it has generated jobs for millions of people. In sum, the Internet has led
to significant benefits to the society and the economy.
2. The Internet in India has only taken 3 years to grow from a subscribers’ base of 100
million to 200 million. This has been catalysed by the growth of wireless telecom
networks in India. On the back of higher adoption of mobile devices as a means to
access the Internet according to the I-Cube 2013 report, the number of Internet
users in India is expected to reach 243 million by June 2014. India is also expected
to overtake the US as the second largest Internet base in the world by the same
time. The robust growth is a result of fast growing Internet ecosystem with a
multitude of local and global players and a thriving Internet economy.
3. Mobile Internet is going to be the game changer for Internet in India. Compared to
0.4 percent mobile Internet users in 2012, the penetration has grown to 2.4 percent,
indicating a substantial growth in the mobile Internet user penetration levels. The
National Telecom Policy (NTP) 2012 envisages broadband penetration to reach 600
million connections by 2020, this implies adding 7 million broadband connections
each month from now onwards. According to an analysis conducted by McKinsey,
the Internet economy in India could grow to $100 billion by 2015 to average 2.8 to
3.3 per cent of GDP, which could facilitate 22 million jobs, if India follows an
inclusive path of Internet expansion.
4. Internet governance can be considered as the development and application of
shared principles, norms, rules, decision-making procedures, and programs that
shape the evolution and use of the Internet. It applies to activities as diverse as the
coordination of technical standards, the operation of critical infrastructure,
development, regulation, and legislation of Internet. There is a need to develop a
coherent strategy for Internet governance ensuring that difficult trade-offs between
competing interests, as well as between distinct public values, are managed in a
consistent, transparent and accountable manner that accurately reflects internet
users priorities.
5. Multi-stakeholder or multi-lateral - two words encapsulating diametrically opposite
views on internet governance stands at the heart of a raging debate across the
globe. Multi-stakeholder control over the world wide web means parties other than
governments, which include the tech community, academia, businesses and civil
society. In a multi-lateral arrangement, only the governments will be the decisionmakers
and every other stakeholder barring the state, is relegated to a purely
advisory role. Simply put, the choice is between total state control over the internet
or a more democratic set-up where other sections of society are also represented.
6. Civil society and businesses are concerned that being relegated to an advisory role
rather than a decision-making one could lead to disregarding or relegating their
positions to a secondary level. Also with the internet being enhanced largely by
private investment and individual demand it is important to safeguard their interests
to enable sustained investment interest by potential investors who will enable the
enhancement in networks providing access and services on the internet.
7. The internet architecture has traditionally been controlled by the US. The demand
for a more democratised set-up, where other countries also have a voice, started in
early 2000s. In 2005, a consensus document, Tunis Agenda, had been signed
under the aegis of the UN. It laid out much of the terms of the debate around
internet governance, including the focus on enhanced cooperation and the need for
a multi-stakeholder model.
8. The internet architecture has had a significant bering on the leadership of the US in
this regard. The demand for a more democratised set-up, where other countries
also have a voice, started in early 2000s. In 2005, a consensus document, Tunis
Agenda, had been signed under the aegis of the UN. It laid out much of the terms of
the debate around internet governance, including the focus on enhanced
cooperation and the need for a multi-stakeholder model.
9. In 2011, India put forward a detailed proposal for a multi-lateral UN body that was
widely criticised by activists and business bodies at home. In Geneva, Government
of India's response to a question on implementing "enhanced cooperation" in a
WGEC questionnaire stated: "A suitable multilateral, transparent and democratic
mechanism must be created where governments, on an equal footing, may carry
out their roles and responsibilities in international public policy issues pertaining to
the Internet and public policy issues pertaining to coordination and management of
critical Internet resources, in consultation with all other stakeholders." This position
has been crticised by cvil society and businesses.
10. A critical factor in the success of the Internet has been the multi-stakeholder
framework and open access. In recent days, however, there is a growing concern
about the excessive influence of one country over some of the internet governance
mechanisms. Governments are coming to terms with their new role in the internet
and social media space. The Tunis Agenda 2005 recognizes a role for multistakeholders
such as government, businesses, civil society, technical community,
academia and media.
11. Several meetings are expected to be held in 2014 including WSIS+10 Review
(February), UN CSTD Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation (February), the
Brazil conference “The Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet
Governance” (April), ICANN High Level Meeting (June), UN Internet Governance
Forum, Istanbul, Turkey (September) and ITU Plenipot in Busan, South Korea
(October – November). Much of the discussion in these meetings is about initiating
dialogue on core internet values and principles that must govern the internet at a
national and global level.