NETmundial-Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance
23-24th April, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
COAI Proposal
A. Internet Governance
1. The phenomenal growth of the Internet has facilitated individual empowerment
and access to information, goods and services across borders; it has lowered
entry barriers and supported the rapid development of small and medium sized
enterprises; it has generated jobs for millions of people. In sum, the Internet has
led to significant benefits to the society and the economy.
2. The Internet in India has only taken 3 years to grow from a subscribers’ base of
100 million to 200 million. This has been catalysed by the growth of wireless
telecom networks in India. On the back of higher adoption of mobile devices as
a means to access the Internet according to the I-Cube 2013 report, the number
of Internet users in India is expected to reach 243 million by June 2014. India is
also expected to overtake the US as the second largest Internet base in the world
by the same time. The robust growth is a result of fast growing Internet
ecosystem with a multitude of local and global players and a thriving Internet
economy.
3. Mobile Internet is going to be the game changer for Internet in India. Compared
to 0.4 percent mobile Internet users in 2012, the penetration has grown to 2.4
percent, indicating a substantial growth in the mobile Internet user penetration
levels. The National Telecom Policy (NTP) 2012 envisages broadband penetration
to reach 600 million connections by 2020, this implies adding 7 million
broadband connections each month from now onwards. According to an analysis
conducted by McKinsey, the Internet economy in India could grow to $100
billion by 2015 to average 2.8 to 3.3 per cent of GDP, which could facilitate 22
million jobs, if India follows an inclusive path of Internet expansion.
4. Internet governance can be considered as the development and application of
shared principles, norms, rules, decision-making procedures, and programs that
shape the evolution and use of the Internet. It applies to activities as diverse as
the coordination of technical standards, the operation of critical infrastructure,
development, regulation, and legislation of Internet. There is a need to develop
a coherent strategy for Internet governance ensuring that difficult trade-offs
between competing interests, as well as between distinct public values, are
managed in a consistent, transparent and accountable manner that accurately
reflects internet users priorities.
5. Multi-stakeholder or multi-lateral - two words encapsulating diametrically
opposite views on internet governance stands at the heart of a raging debate
across the globe. Multi-stakeholder control over the world wide web means
parties other than governments, which include the tech community, academia,
businesses and civil society. In a multi-lateral arrangement, only the
governments will be the decision-makers and every other stakeholder barring
the state, is relegated to a purely advisory role. Simply put, the choice is
between total state control over the internet or a more democratic set-up where
other sections of society are also represented.
6. Civil society and businesses are concerned that being relegated to an advisory
role rather than a decision-making one could lead to disregarding or relegating
their positions to a secondary level. Also with the internet being enhanced
largely by private investment and individual demand it is important to safeguard
their interests to enable sustained investment interest by potential investors
who will enable the enhancement in networks providing access and services on
the internet.
7. The internet architecture has traditionally been controlled by the US. The
demand for a more democratised set-up, where other countries also have a
voice, started in early 2000s. In 2005, a consensus document, Tunis Agenda, had
been signed under the aegis of the UN. It laid out much of the terms of the
debate around internet governance, including the focus on enhanced
cooperation and the need for a multi-stakeholder model.
8. The internet architecture has had a significant bering on the leadership of the US
in this regard. The demand for a more democratised set-up, where other
countries also have a voice, started in early 2000s. In 2005, a consensus
document, Tunis Agenda, had been signed under the aegis of the UN. It laid out
much of the terms of the debate around internet governance, including the
focus on enhanced cooperation and the need for a multi-stakeholder model.
9. In 2011, India put forward a detailed proposal for a multi-lateral UN body that
was widely criticised by activists and business bodies at home. In Geneva,
Government of India's response to a question on implementing "enhanced
cooperation" in a WGEC questionnaire stated: "A suitable multilateral,
transparent and democratic mechanism must be created where governments,
on an equal footing, may carry out their roles and responsibilities in international
public policy issues pertaining to the Internet and public policy issues pertaining
to coordination and management of critical Internet resources, in consultation
with all other stakeholders." This position has been crticised by cvil society and
businesses.
10. A critical factor in the success of the Internet has been the multi-stakeholder
framework and open access. In recent days, however, there is a growing
concern about the excessive influence of one country over some of the internet
governance mechanisms. Governments are coming to terms with their new role
in the internet and social media space. The Tunis Agenda 2005 recognizes a role
for multi-stakeholders such as government, businesses, civil society, technical
community, academia and media.
11. Several meetings are expected to be held in 2014 including WSIS+10 Review
(February), UN CSTD Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation (February), the
Brazil conference “The Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of
Internet Governance” (April), ICANN High Level Meeting (June), UN Internet
Governance Forum, Istanbul, Turkey (September) and ITU Plenipot in Busan,
South Korea (October – November). Much of the discussion in these meetings is
about initiating dialogue on core internet values and principles that must govern
the internet at a national and global level.
B. Internet Governance Principles
12. COAI, which represents the largest industry association and serves nearly 800
million mobile subscribers, provides the platform for the single largest access to
internet and social media platforms, using wireless devices, smart phones and
other related technologies. Our members who are primarily responsible for
access, and also participate in a range of issues which comprise the "internet
governance" space, including Access and Diversity, Multilingualism, New
Technologies such as IPv6, Cyber and Telecom Network Security and several
Emerging Issues. A draft of some of the basic principles is provided below:
a) Recognize and develop a multi-stakeholder approach to policy development:
Internet governance efforts cannot be limited to global governments; the
Internet is a system that has thrived on the cooperation of a diversity of
stakeholders including the industry, civil society, and the technical community.
Therefore, an Internet governance policy has to be formed through an open,
transparent and inclusive process.
b) Support and promote an open and connected Internet: The Internet has
flourished in an open and free environment through a successful combination of
user empowerment, consensus driven voluntary codes and free market
dynamics. It must be recognized that the real value of the Internet comes from
the fact that it empowers the individual to access and share information across
borders and if barriers are introduced that interfere with this openness and
connectivity, the real value of the Internet will be diminished. Therefore, any
policy framework for the Internet must support openness and connectivity.
c) Promote investment in critical infrastructure: Deployment of high-speed
broadband Internet networks is essential for promoting access, driving economic
growth and creating jobs in India. India must invest in developing the required
broadband infrastructure on a national scale public policy should provide
appropriate incentives to the private sector to provide last mile connectivity to
the end users, especially in rural areas.
d) Promote and protect the free flow of information: The Internet’s openness has
played a central role in empowering individual’s to access and disseminate
information globally. While the Govt. must work towards addressing concerns
relating to protection of personal data, safety of children and cyber security,
fundamental freedoms of speech and privacy should not be curtailed under the
garb of security. The government must adopt a principles based approach to
surveillance especially ensuring an independent judicial oversight mechanism for
all surveillance activities.
e) Promote creation of multilingual content: There is a dearth of multilingual
content and public policy should provide incentives for entrepreneurs and app
developers for the creation and dissemination of content in all major Indian
languages. This will empower people from all states in India to access
information, goods and services of their choice.
f) Limit intermediary liability: Intermediary laws in India need to be reviewed so
that hampering of free speech on the Internet by encouraging private censorship
of content and hindering innovation and investment by imposing burdensome
compliances on intermediaries conducting business in India is taken care of.
Laws imposing appropriate limitations on intermediary liability particularly in
relation to third party content should be fair and reasonable and provide for
expression of free speech within constitutionally permissible limits and allow
intermediaries to provide services without undue harassment so that the
Internet remains a level playing field that rewards innovation and
entrepreneurship.
C. Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
13. The policies that shape the Internet impact not only the development of the
technologies themselves, but also the realization of internationally agreed
human rights, social equity and interdependence, cultural concerns, and both
social and economic development. Our vision is that Internet governance should
be inclusive, people centered and development oriented. Any policy framework
for the Internet must support openness and connectivity.
14. The avialbility of affordable broadband connectivity to support internet services
must make a feasible business case for the private sector which is expected to
invest most significantly in laying down the networks and infrastructure support.
15. Internet governance efforts should encompass all necessary stakeholders in a
manner that ensures that views of all stakeholders including the Govt. are
considered on an equal footing, and all stakeholders have a role in the decisionmaking.
16. The government must adopt a principles based approach to surveillance
especially ensuring an independent judicial oversight mechanism for all
surveillance activities. Futher, vernacular support should be encouraged to
increase the proliferation of Internet services.