Contribution from the Government of Canada to the Global
Multi-Stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet
Governance/NETmundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Michael Walma, Director, Policy Planning
Region: Canada
Organization: Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development
Sector: Government
Keywords: Free, Open, Secure, Multistakeholder
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Canada?s vision of the Internet is one which is free, open and secure. We envision a
future in which:individuals in every corner of the globe can easily connect to the Internet,
information and ideas flowfreely online, individuals? rights and freedoms are protected,
networked technologies continue togenerate prosperity and spur innovation, and in which
our information and digital infrastructure areprotected.
Document
Global Multi-Stakeholder Meeting on
the Future of Internet
Governance/NETmundialSao Paulo,
April 23-24Contribution from the
Government of Canada
The Government of Canada welcomes the opportunity to contribute to the discussion at
the Sao PauloNETmundial meeting in the elaboration Internet governance principles and
a roadmap for the furtherevolution of the Internet governance ecosystem. We appreciate
the opportunity to participate in theNETmunidal meeting, and look forward to a broad and
inclusive multistakeholder discussion.
Internet Governance Principles
Canada’s vision of the Internet is one which is free, open and secure. We envision a
future in which:individuals in every corner of the globe can easily connect to the Internet,
information and ideas flowfreely online, individuals’ rights and freedoms are protected,
networked technologies continue togenerate prosperity and spur innovation, and in which
our information and digital infrastructure areprotected.
Canada recognizes importance of efforts taking place in a range of organisations in
support of thedevelopment of Internet principles to reflect national, regional, and
international priorities. Canada also acknowledges the key principles established by the
World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) Principles for Internet Policy Making, the G8 Deauville
declaration, Human Rights Council Resolution 20/8, and the Freedom Online Coalition
founding declaration as significant contributions to the wider discussion of Internet
governance principles. The Principles for the Governance and Use of the Internet
developed by the Brazil Internet Steering Committee are a particularly noteworthy
example at the national level.
We are optimistic that the NETmundial meeting provides an opportunity to take stock of
these previousefforts, to find the common ground and to contribute to the current and
future discussions on InternetGovernance issues. In order to achieve this objective,
Canada believes our discussions would benefitfrom the following principles with the
following qualities:
High-level in nature in order to stand the test of time in a fast-changing,
technology drivenenvironment;
Drawn from common provisions found in previous articulations of Internet
principles, existinginternational law and based on Internet-related tenets
that already enjoy widespread oruniversal support;
Reflect a consensus among all stakeholders within the global Internet
community.
Canada offers the following principles which, in our view, reflect these qualities and which
will serve tofoster an environment for an Internet which is free, open and secure:
A Free Internet
Promote and Protect Human Rights - Respect for human rights, including
expression,association, and privacy-related rights is essential in promoting and preserving
a democraticsociety. The same rights apply equally online as they do offline.Universality –
Access to information on the Internet should be universal and non-discriminatory.
Rule of law – Laws, regulations and policies applicable to the Internet are transparent
andrespect the rule of law. International law and other traditional norms of behaviours that
govern state relations, including international human rights law and international
humanitarian law apply online as they do offline.
An Open Internet
Inclusive Multistakeholder Decision-making – Stakeholders from across the global
Internetcommunity, including Internet users, business, expert technical organizations, and
governments collectively develop policies and make decisions based on consensus in a
transparent and inclusive manner.
One global Internet– Commitment to the Internet as a single, interoperable and
unfragmented technology to allow Internet users to innovate and capture the social and
economic benefits.
Foster Innovation and Economic Growth - It is critical that the international community
rally to preserve and foster an online environment that promotes, rather than constrains
dynamism and human creativity. Internet governance must be undertaken in a way to
encourage innovation and promote economic growth and development. Reinforcing an
open and decentralized Internet will bring economic benefits to all. By 2017, over a billion
new Internet users are expected to come online, with the vast majority connecting via
mobile devices in the global south. It will be important to ensure that these new Internet
users are able to contribute and influence outcomes as part of the multistakeholder
decision-making processes at the relevant institutions, including those in place to address
Internet technical matters.
A Secure Internet
Promoting security – Internet users must be able to have trust and confidence that they
are safe online and not be subject to malicious cyber activity. All stakeholders have a role
to play in improving security of digital networks that support economic prosperity and
socialdevelopment.
Stable, Secure and Resilient – The security, stability and resiliency of the Internet is
ofparamount importance and all stakeholders must work together to ensure that it is
preserved.
A Roadmap for the Future Evolution of the Internet
Governance Ecosystem
A Strengthened Multistakeholder model – The multistakeholder model of Internet
governance hasbeen a key driver in the success of the Internet to date. Canada firmly
supports this model and believes it must continue to be the foundation for all discussions
in order to preserve the Internet’s open architecture. Canada firmly supports
strengthening this model. Government centric approaches would stifle the innovation and
dynamism associated with the Internet. The current model has led toenhanced
productivity, innovation and inclusion, creating better quality of life and economic growth
inthe global digital economy. Canada would not support an existing or new multilateral
institution tooversee or manage the Internet ecosystem. Doing so would pose a real risk
of diminishing truemultistakeholder governance, and replacing it with a state centric, top
down approach. Such anapproach does not adequately recognize the decentralized
nature of the Internet and the need to adapt to rapid technological changes as the Internet
evolves.
Support for the further globalization of the Internet technical organizations -
Promote inclusivity by working with partners, yet being clear that security and stability is of
paramount importance. Canada would be interested in pursuing questions related to
further globalization in order to reflect the evolution of the Internet.
An Invigorated Internet Governance Forum (IGF) – Taking into account the
recommendations of the Working Group on the Improvements of the IGF, Canada
underscores the value of the IGF as a forum for discussion of Internet Public Policy
related issues and calls for the extension of the IGF mandate beyond 2015. In addition, it
is important that the IGF secretariat be strengthened.