Submission to the Global Stakeholder Meeting on the Future
of Internet Governance
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Nick Ashton-Hart
Region: US, EU, Geneva
Organization: Computer & Communications Industry Association (CCIA)
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords:
Abstract
PRINCIPLES DEVELOPMENT:A healthy and effective Internet Governance ecosystem
presupposes agreement on what is, and what is not, within the scope of that term. Despite
the adoption of a definition of Internet Governance almost 10 years ago, disagreement on
its meaning continues. We propose four principles we believe the Meeting should endorse
to create a common understanding of what aspects of policy should properly be
considered as Internet governance related, principles we believe are not in conflict with
the Tunis Agenda definition.ROADMAP FOR THE ECOSYSTEM:A roadmap only
becomes practical if agreement on the scope of what is, and is not, Internet Governance
related can be achieved. We build upon the Four Principles in this section to propose:1) A
set of improvements to IG processes;2) Mechanisms for IG processes to relate to other
policy areas not IG related but with an internet dimension.
Document
Submission to the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet
Governance
8th March 2014
Section 1. Internet Governance Principles
The Computer & Communications Industry Association (CCIA) welcomes the opportunity
to participate in the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance
(“the Meeting”). CCIA represents a broad cross-section of the world’s leading technology
companies that collectively employ hundreds of thousands of people and generating
hundreds of billions of dollars in annual turnover, contributing to the economies of the
majority of the world’s countries and territories and in all its regions. Like the rest of the
economy, our member companies rely on an open, stable, secure, resilient, and
interoperable Internet. We believe that a healthy, vibrant, stable, effective, and pluralistic
Internet governance system is essential, and that all stakeholders with a role in
developing, maintaining, or using the Internet must be able to participate in, and impact,
decisions that would impact them or it.
Four Principles to Create a Common Understanding of What Is, and Is Not, Internet
Governance-Related
In order to have a healthy and effective Internet Governance ecosystem, it is first
necessary to have agreement on what is, and what is not, within the scope of that term.
Despite the adoption of a definition of Internet Governance almost 10 years ago
[1]
,
disagreement on its meaning continues to this day.
We propose four principles we believe the Global Stakeholder Meeting on the Future of
Internet Governance should endorse to create a common understanding of what aspects
of policy should properly be considered as Internet governance related, principles we
believe are not in conflict with the Tunis Agenda definition.
First Principle: The network and the data that network carries are in fact (and are to
be treated as) entirely separate at the policy level
The “network of networks” that is the Internet is made possible by a set of systems and
services that interoperate to make it possible for any point “a” to connect to any point “b”
anywhere in the world. These systems and services operate separately from the data that
is communicated once the connection between points is made. It consists of: unique
identifiers like Internet Protocol (IP) addresses and Domain Names; submarine, overland
cable, satellite and mobile links; Internet exchange points (IXP); and software and
hardware based security infrastructure implementing common standards (such as
DNSSec) to ensure the point ‘b’ you reach is the authentic ‘point b’.
Second Principle: No stakeholder may take measures that compromise the ability
of the network to connect the greatest number of users at the lowest cost and as
efficiently as possible.
We note that a subset of this is that countries must not take measures with respect to the
network infrastructure located on territory under their control that would impact
neighbouring or other countries to which that infrastructure directly connects - just as
countries are constrained, for example, from disruption to riverine systems that pass
through multiple countries other than their own.
Third Principle: The management of, and access to, data that traverses the network
is not a subject of international Internet Governance.
The understanding of what constitutes private information, criminal behaviour, libel, fraud,
and many other aspects of communications are the remit of national law; defining these
terms is an essential element of national sovereignty. Where international law addresses
issues to create global norms or processes, those fora are best suited to discuss and
reach agreement on measures for the digital environment as regards data in that domain.
In other words, what takes place online is no different than what takes place in the
physical world. Both spheres tackle the same challenges and the existing mechanisms for
dealing with those challenges should be utilized rather than create a separate set of
organizations or rules that only apply to the Internet. For example, with respect to human
rights, the Human Rights Council and the instruments to which it relates address the
online and offline aspects of that area of law. With respect to the economic use of data,
there are international arrangements and processes in world trade law such as the WTO,
UNCTAD, and OECD (for all, developing, and developed countries respectively) whereby
commercial rules between countries as well as bilateral arrangements are dealt with.
Fourth Principle: Regulating the Internet, or technology more generally, will not
solve social problems.
The surveillance activities revealed over the last several months that are the subject of
concern are spawning proposals in various countries, such as obliging commercial
operators to host certain kinds of data in given geographic locations. This will have
unintended negative side effects without changing the relative security of that data, and
without solving the underlying issue related to the lack of cooperative arrangements
between countries to ensure governments can ensure the security of their citizens. Such
a discussion is fundamentally not about the Internet or Internet Governance but rather
how all stakeholders can cooperate regarding serious security threats.
A general agreement on the above four principles would bring a great deal of clarity as to
what is, and is not, the proper remit for activities related to Internet Governance and
where subjects with an ‘Internet dimension’ that are not Internet Governance related
should be discussed. It would also make designing and delimiting Internet Governance
activities more sustainable, likely to result in discussions with maximum utility, and ensure
outcomes with the least likelihood of unintended negative consequences.
Global Internet Governance principles
As noted above, there already exists a fulsome list of global principles that apply to the
Internet. The compilation of Internet Governance principles on the NetMundial website is
quite exhaustive and reflects a broad international consensus. In particular, we draw
attention to the Internet Governance Principles by the Council of Europe, the EU
Commission COMPACT, the Principles for the Governance and Use of the Internet by
CGI.br, the OECD Principles for Internet Decision-Making, the Global Network Initiative
Principles, and the APC Code of Practice on Internet Governance, which all offer very
balanced and sensible guidelines.
We believe that NetMundial could serve a very valuable purpose by seeking to distil those
principles into a set generally agreeable across all stakeholder groups. From our
perspective, the following principles seem of particular value to define what Internet
Governance processes should embody:
? Inclusiveness and diversity
? Transparency and accountability
? Access
? Universality
? Interoperability and Standardisation
? Security, stability, and decentralization of the network
? Openness and neutrality of the network
With respect to multi stakeholder participation, we suggest there is a need to adopt a set
of minimum standards for the quality and nature of such participation, and that this should
be based upon existing understandings such as the Aarhus Convention’s commitments
on public participation and the process of broadening that understanding beyond the
Convention’s remit.
[2]
The International Association for Public Participation (IAP2) has
also done excellent work in this vein; its Core Principles are widely used
[3]
.
Section 2. Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
Introduction
To create a road map for Internet Governance going forward, a common understanding
on what is, and is not, within scope is necessary; taking the four principles above as a
foundation, we have proposals below on how to improve Internet Governance
arrangements.
However, the question of how Internet Governance arrangements intersect and interact
with other public policy issues that have a strong ‘Internet dimension’ is equally important.
This was anticipated 10 years ago in the Tunis Agenda’s Article 35(a):
“Policy authority for Internet-related public policy issues is the sovereign right of States.
They have rights and responsibilities for international Internet-related public policy issues.”
Like the definition of Internet Governance itself, this paragraph has also been subject to
disputed interpretation. We suggest some ideas for how Internet Governance processes
can better relate to these policy areas, when appropriate, below.
Roadmap for Core Internet Governance Issues
If you accept the four principles developed in section 1, it becomes much simpler to
identify core Internet Governance issues.
Internet protocols and other technical standards have rapidly evolved through a set of
diverse organizations, each with different core functions and strengths. In our view, and
as other submissions have pointed out, stakeholders should continue to rely on the
existing structures to develop global policies and seek to improve them where necessary
rather than relying on either existing multilateral arrangements or starting over and
creating a new governance body with a duplicative function.
Existing Internet Governance arrangements include institutions like the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF), the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and the Internet
Architecture Board (IAB) for global standards and protocols, the Internet Corporation for
the Assignment of Names and Numbers (ICANN) and Regional Internet Registries (RIRs)
for the coordination of unique identifiers, and the UN’s Internet Governance Forum (IGF),
which brings together all stakeholders including academia, governments, civil society, and
industry to foster discussion or critical Internet issues.
What these arrangements share is an understanding that all stakeholders who have a role
in developing, maintaining, or use of the Internet must be able to participate in, and
impact, decisions that would impact them or it. There are many perspectives on multistakeholder-
ism and what it means. The reality is that the Internet of today is a web of
collaboration, built upon open standards, involving all the parties necessary to ensure the
Internet and the data it carries operates today and evolves for tomorrow.
Here are just a few ideas for how existing organisations could be improved:
? Increased outreach, capacity building and training for regulators. While many if not all
of the technical meetings are open to all participants, the majority of the meetings
historically have taken place in the developed world and their processes can be difficult to
grasp as a newcomer. We applaud recent efforts undertaken by the IETF and ISOC to
increase the global reach of their meetings as well as offer fellowships to engineers and
policymakers from the developing world. We would support similar efforts in this space in
other fora as these present important opportunities to engage thought leaders globally.
? Increase and diversify newcomer sessions. International organizations should make it
easier for newer participants to meaningfully engage in their processes. To do this, these
organizations should offer training and newcomer sessions both at their physical meetings
and remotely as a means of introducing more people to the organizations and
encouraging them to participate in critical Internet governance debates.
? Improve transparency and accountability. Multilateral organizations whose missions
touch the Internet (e.g., UNESCO, OECD, UN, and ITU) should provide better
transparency and accountability in their decision-making processes and how the overall
decisions impact the Internet. All institutions should strive to make relevant governance
and policy documents available to all stakeholders at no cost - and easy to find.
? Open, accessible meetings. Participation in board and governance meetings of
Internet governance organizations should be open whenever possible. For many
participants, it is difficult and often cost-prohibitive to attend meetings in person. For that
reason, Internet governance institutions should improve remote participation logistics and
opportunities.
? Improve accessibility of institutions and reduce barriers to entry. The assortment of
organizations and overlapping missions can be confusing and difficult to navigate without
considerable time and effort. All institutions should collaborate to create portals online
where their interrelationships and the scope of their activities is easy for new entrants to
understand.
? Institutions should consider collaborating to organize physical meetings of more than
one organisation in the same city and closely enough in time that participants could attend
them all; this would reduce travel costs and time.
? All organisations with a global mandate have an obligation to ensure multilingual
documents and interpretation in multiple languages is available for key documents and
meetings respectively.
Policy Areas With an Internet Dimension But Outside of Internet Governance
What about issues that are not covered by these policy fora? We submit that they fall into
two categories or types:
1. Issues where international norms exist, but where a networked world has created
challenges in implementation of these norms;
2. Issues where no norms exist but where conflicts in national laws have arisen primarily
because of a networked world.
Both fall squarely within the Fourth Principle’s ambit: they are social issues with an online
component but they are not Internet issues – and therefore entirely outside Internet
Governance. Here are examples of each:
Type 1
Human and Political Rights: The various human rights treaties are the responsibility of the
UN’s Human Rights Council (HRC) and some of the provisions are considered jus cogens
- globally binding on all States. The HRC has decided that existing human rights apply
fully in the online environment. However, many states are facing difficult questions: how
does the right of free speech apply within their states when non-nationals may post
information to non-locally-based, yet locally-used, popular websites that infringe local laws
or social mores.
Type 2:
The treatment of personally identifying information (PII) falls into two categories:
1. Its use by non-state actors, and;
2. Its use by state actors.
In neither case are there international norms specifically addressing the use of PII
[4]
. This
is because in an analogue past, physical data related to people simply didn’t travel across
borders routinely in large amounts related to entire populations, yet on the Internet this
happens daily and routinely. It must be emphasised that these two categories are entirely
different in almost every respect and need to be dealt with separately for a multitude of
reasons, just the most stark example being that use by non-state actors generally involves
consent by the user, and use by state actors not only is often non-consensual but is often
not even known of by the user.
Roadmap for Policy Areas With an Internet Dimension
For issues of ‘Type 1’ there’s a need for the ‘Internet dimension’ to be fully a part of the
deliberations of those processes mandated to address them. Creating additional
processes that are ‘Internet-centric’ to address them would be a mistake:
1. The subject matter is not fundamentally Internet related and so shouldn’t ‘belong’ to
Internet policy;
2. The subject matter expertise is centred in the existing process and decisions made
without that context and expertise are unlikely to be as well-informed as they should.
Existing fora need to accept that the Internet dimension to ‘their’ issue must engage all
stakeholders in developing solutions that they will either need to live with or help
implement. This requires a truly multi-stakeholder process to bring the Internet
community into collaboration with existing processes that are not inherently multi
stakeholder (such as the UN’s HRC). Such processes should be based on existing best
practices and norms as previously mentioned.
With respect to Type 2, the challenge is more complex. First agreement that an
international discussion on the subject is needed, and further agreement on what aspects
of which of the two subtypes mentioned above should be discussed and in what context.
For example, the treatment of non-nationals by national security mechanisms are greatly
complicated because the Internet allows the gathering of information globally at a low
marginal cost and almost instantly yet the only norms that are not contested by states to
limit their behaviour are bilateral agreements such as Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties
(MLATs)[5], most of which predate the Internet’s widespread adoption.
How Can Internet Governance Policy Interact with Issues that Impact the Internet,
Yet Are Outside the Scope of Internet Governance?
In many ways, the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance
is an attempt to answer the question immediately above: without the surveillance
disclosures of the last several months, the Meeting would not have been proposed or
convened. A dynamic has been created where governments feel action must be taken to
protect their citizens’ data from foreign surveillance agencies. One avenue they’re clearly
pursuing is to look at Internet Governance arrangements due to the historical accident
that has provided a unique role to the US government with respect to certain technical
functions.
A major success for the Meeting would be to create a consensus around the ideas we
espouse in the Fourth Principle and then through proposing practical measures that can
meet the gap in the current landscape.
One of the most straightforward is through improvements to the Internet Governance
Forum system (the international IGF and the regional and national versions). All
stakeholders are represented in these meetings, yet the discussions too often do not have
conclusions; where they do, there is no mechanism by which those conclusions can be
taken further. We suggest the following:
? The IGF should continue to be an informal, dialogue-centred process, but that dialogue
should prioritize the activities that fall into two main areas, rather than continuing to simply
host workshops in various subject areas as has been the case thus far:
a. Look at the various areas outside Internet Governance where a profound impact on the
Internet, or where Internet Governance could have a profound impact, is likely and the
venues where those areas are being discussed and create opportunities for the IG
community and those other communities to interact. The IGF should also seek to identify
issues with an Internet dimension that are not currently being addressed elsewhere and
consider how a conversation could be structured as a starting point, if there’s general
consensus that such a conversation is needed;
b. Create space whereby the national and regional IGF conclusions are visible and
discussed at the international IGF, and vice-versa, to allow better sharing between these
IGFs of good ideas, concerns, and activities.
? The IGF Secretariat should be greatly strengthened and mandated to create
interagency links between existing fora where the Internet dimension is identified by the
IGF as significant; it should also be able to propose processes that need attention to the
IGF. It should also have the capacity to track and interact with discussions with an Internet
dimension taking place in other agencies or processes and create dialogue between it,
the IGF, and those others.
Conclusion
In order to develop a common understanding of, and a road map for the future
development of the global Internet policy landscape, it is fundamental to establish a clear
distinction between core Internet Governance issues and the wider set of issues with an
Internet dimension.
While it is important to make existing Internet Governance arrangements more diverse
and accessible, the key question is how they are to interact with other policy areas outside
of Internet Governance, but with an Internet dimension. This includes both areas where
international norms exist, i.e. through Human Rights obligations, and areas that are
fundamentally governed by national laws and where no international norms exist, i.e. the
use of PII information.
Instead of creating additional, ‘Internet-specific’’ processes to address areas where the
subject matter is not fundamentally Internet related and the expertise is, therefore, centred
in other, existing processes, existing fora need to embrace the Internet dimension of their
issues and start to engage with the Internet community. With regards to the latter, the
situation is more challenging. Before effective international coordination can take place,
agreement on the need for norms need to be reached - or at least the need for an
international ‘conversation’.
The IGF should play a key role. It can facilitate the coordination between existing
institutions and the Internet community and it can help identify new areas where
international norms are needed. However, the IGF and its Secretariat would need to be
strengthened to assume these additional responsibilities.
We thank the organisers of the Meeting for this opportunity to submit our views and look
forward to the next steps and to the meeting itself.
[1]
Tunis Agenda for the Information Society, Article 34, at
http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html.
[2]
The relevant text of the Convention may be found here:
http://www.unece.org/env/pp/contentpp.html while more information on the process of
expanding and implementing these principles is here:
http://www.unece.org/env/pp/ppif.html
[3]
The Core Values of IAP2 are to be found here: http://www.iap2.org/?page=A4
[4]
Though it is certainly true that human rights instruments affirm a right to privacy, these
obligations are not granular enough to define what activities may be undertaken by what
stakeholders and in what circumstances and states have not, so far, been able to reach
consensus on the relationship between these obligations and national security in the
online environment in key respects.
[5] AccessNow has created an excellent website with material about MLATs worldwide in
the context of access to PII of individuals. It can be found at https://mlat.info/app.php/.