Joint Contributions of Civil Society Organizations from Latin
America to NetMundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Fatima Cambronero
Region: Latin America
Organization: Group of individuals and Civil Society Organizations from
Latin America
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: human rights, capacity building, multistakeholderism, latin
america, infrastructure, open internet, inclusiveness
Abstract
Civil Society Organizations from across Latin America join to add their contributions to the
Net Mundial meeting.It is important to Civil Society Organizations from Latin-America to
express our point of view about the future of Internet Governance because we are a
relevant component of the Internet Governance Ecosystem and the region where part of
the next 2-other-billion Internet users are going to come from.Considering this, we have to
build the road in our Region for the future, enhancing cooperation in infrastructure and
capacity building among others, so those users can participate in the Internet Ecosystem
in a more informed and qualified manner. For all those reasons, we think it is important
that the voice of the Civil Society Organizations from Latin America shall be heard and
involved in the discussion of the Set of Internet Governance Principles and the Roadmap
for the future evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem.
Document
Joint Contributions of Civil Society Organizations from Latin America to NetMundial
Abstract
Civil Society Organizations from across Latin America join to add their contributions to the
Net Mundial meeting.
It is important to Civil Society Organizations from Latin-America to express ourpoint of
view about the future of Internet Governance because we are a relevant component of the
Internet Governance Ecosystem and the region where part of the next 2-other-billion
Internet users are going to come from.
Considering this, we have to build the road in our Region for the future, enhancing
cooperation in infrastructure and capacity building among others, so those users can
participate in the Internet Ecosystem in a more informed and qualified manner.
For all those reasons, we think it is important that the voice of the Civil Society
Organizations from Latin America shall be heard and involved in the discussion of the Set
of Internet Governance Principles and the Roadmap for the future evolution of the Internet
Governance Ecosystem.
Content Contribution:
Introduction
The members of the Civil Society Organization Network of Latin America thank the
Government of Brazil in coordination with the global Internet community, for the
opportunity to participate and make contributions to the Global Multistakeholder Meeting
on the future of Internet Governance.
Latin America represents 48.2% of Internet users from the Americas, with an average
penetration of almost 40%, which is higher than the general worldwide penetration rate
[1]. Latin America had the fastest-growing Internet population of all regions in the world,
growing 12 percent between 2012 and 2013, and reaching more than 147 million unique
web visitors as of last March. Latin America is also an important space for economic and
social innovation, with the massive presence and use of social networks. Latin America is
an incredible environment of creativity and social mobilization, with increasing expert
capacity regarding the knowledge and skills that are needed to fulfill the goals of the
information society.
However, the challenges in the region are still significant when addressing the evolving
Internet ecosystem thatwhichmust take into consideration the rights of a variety of
stakeholders. During the past few years in Latin America, we have witnessed the
emergence of laws and policies that violate core digital rights.In several of those
instances, such laws and policies were developed in a non-transparent non-accountable
environment, without proper consultation with all affected parties. Thus, it is crucial to
present our proposals to this consultativeprocess. We hope to see the results of Net
Mundial as a positive way forward for the development of the Internet, and the guarantee
of digital and human rights in the region.
Considering this, we have to build the road in our Region for the future, enhancing
cooperation in infrastructure and capacity building among others, so those users can
participate in the Internet Ecosystem in a more informed and qualified manner.
It is important that the voice of the Civil Society Organizations from Latin America is
heardand involved in the discussion of the Set of Internet Governance Principles and the
Roadmap for the future evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem.
1. Set of Internet Governance Principles
To begin, we must define Internet Governance:
Internet governance is the development and application by Governments, the private
sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, rules,
decision-making procedures, and programmes that shape the evolution and use of the
Internet (Working Definition of World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS).
As members of Civil Society Organizations of Latin America, exercising our role in the
Internet Governance Ecosystem, we defend the Internet as it was designed in the
beginning, as open, interoperable, decentralized, inclusive, unique, democratic,
participative, global, transparent, equal, neutral, free, innovative and, respectful of human
rights and rule of laws.
We fully support several sets of Internet Governance Principles that have already been
elaborated. According to the nature of Internet and the development of Latin America, we
consider appropriate and adequate for our region to emphasize our adherence to the
following principles, without diminishing any others:
1. RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, 20/8 THE
PROMOTION, PROTECTION AND ENJOYMENT OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE
INTERNET[2]
Affirms that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected online, in
particular freedom of expression, which is applicable regardless of frontiers and through
any media of one’s choice, in accordance with articles 19 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
2. OCDE[3]
Promote and protect the free flow of information.
Promote the open, distributed and interconnected nature of Internet.
Encourage multi-stakeholder cooperation in policy development processes.
Develop capacities to bring publicly available, reliable data into the policymaking
process.
Ensure transparency, fair process, and accountability.
Strengthen consistency and effectiveness in privacy protection at a global
level.
Promote Creativity and Innovation.
Limit Internet intermediary liability.
3. PRINCIPLES FOR THE GOVERNANCE AND USE OF THE INTERNET - CGI.br[4]
Freedom, privacy and human rights.
Universality.
Diversity.
Neutrality of the Network.
Standardization and interoperability.
4. APC INTERNET RIGHTS CHARTER[5]
Internet Access for all.
Freedom of expression and Association.
Access to knowledge.
Shared learning and creation - free and open software and technology
development.
2. Roadmap for the further evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
As Civil Society Organizations trying to fulfill our role in the Internet Governance
Ecosystem and guided by the regional perspective, we want to highlight the road that has
to be built in our Region in order to comply with the principles cited above.
1. Multi-stakeholder Model
To defend and reinforce the multistakeholder model, the bottom-up
process, based in consensus and equal footing of all stakeholders in the
different fora of discussion and decision making on the Internet
Governance.
ICANN internationalization: a) Increase the real, effective and active
regional participation, investing in outreach, capacity building, efficient
communication. b) Root servers located outside the U.S. territory,
distributed equally by region. c) Transparency and accountability in
compliance with ATRT2.
To defend and reinforce the global IGF. Review the IGF mandate allowing
the elaboration of non-binding recommendations to nurture other fora
where binding recommendations are decided.
To strengthen the LACIGF by: a) Increasing participation of all
stakeholders, specifically governmental participation. b) Continuing
discussions of the agenda and a follow-up throughout the year. c) Creating
a repository of the materials produced during the discussions. d) Creating
a Latin American Internet Governance Observatory, in charge of
monitoring the development of the themes discussed in the LACIGF
Agenda that are treated in other fora. d) Promoting the elaboration of nonbinding
recommendations. e) Promoting and encouraging the creation of
national IGF’s building incentives for the exchange of experiences and
best practices. f) Stimulating participation of youth and young adults, the
future leaders of the Internet, futuredecision-makers and creators in the
digital environment. Applying the methodology of “Learning by doing and
role playing”.
Communicating multi-stakeholder processes in a friendly, clear, easy,
transparent, accessible, open and multilingual manner.
Ensure that no government or region shall have predominance in the
Internet Governance Ecosystem.
2. Capacity Building and Technical Assistance
The major necessity in our region is capacity building on Internet Governance Issues. Its
natural home is the Academy. When the Academy fails on building capacity it’s Civil
Society, the Government, or individual experts the ones fulfilling this need. For these
objectives it’s essential to build a pool of regional trainers, and an online learning platform
to provide this services in all the languages of the region in collaboration with regional and
global I* organizations.
Capacity building is also important for increasing government participation in all of these
fora. By building capacity in government representatives, the public policy discussion
agenda will immediately increase and improve. Investing on continued capacity building is
a way to assure continuous participation, discussion and national representation of
governments in the global discussion.
3. Access
Infrastructure is the main issue about access in our region. We still need
investments, (being public, private or public-private partnerships) to build
physical infrastructure. Infrastructure is important to reduce the digital
divide and allow access. It is a fact that mobile penetration is higher than
broadband Internet penetration in our region. That should be taken into
account when reducing the digital divide. The governments of our region
should work in collaboration with other stakeholders (civil society,
technical and academic community, private sector) by creating permanent
working-groups for the promotion of universal and non-discriminatory
access to the Internet, ensuring network neutrality, access to broadband
and to the universal Internet and shortening access divide (knowledge,
generational, gender, between the native, urban and rural population). In
addition, many governments in our region still need to understand the
importance of promoting the Internet for development and that Internet is
about opportunity and permission-less innovation, and no longer a luxury
for its citizens. The implementation of universal Internet access should be
included in our government public policies agenda, in collaboration with
other stakeholders, each of them acting on their respective roles. Another
essential or necessary infrastructure component is establishing IXP’s in
the countries of our region, reaching public-private collaboration
agreements. This will bring positive consequences as the decreasing
costs in access and increasing content production and access to them.
In another access layer, we can mention the access to content, which is
another very important issue for our region where actions should be
planned. To ensure that the citizens of our region countries have free and
easy access to the content circulating on the Internet, our governments
must work in the development or improvement of laws that guarantee
freedom of expression, both offline and online, avoiding government
measures or measures from content provider private companies leading to
internet content censorship as well as actions of self-censorship due to
fear of reprisals; blocking Internet content and pursuit of citizens wishing to
freely express their opinions, ideas or beliefs on the Internet. In addition,
our governments should work to update our copyright laws to suit our
regional realities and needs. This should go in hand with the development
and promotion of free culture, open source, education of citizens about
their digital rights and the promotion and development of free competitive
services and products in the local and foreign market. This will bring
benefits in two ways: it will allow the entire population to have free access
to contents that are produced and distributed openly, avoiding access
barriers for paying expensive software licenses, hardware and/or services.
These free culture promotion activities will increase local content, will
promote innovation and will promote regional content growth, while also
increasing cooperation in the region and the creation of new jobs.
4. Inclusion and Diversity
We emphasize the need to invest in access and infrastructure to achieve and guarantee
true inclusion and diversity forchildren, youth, adults, elders, indigenous, women, disabled
people, and the respect for multilingualism, multiculturalism and the preservation of oral
cultures.
5. Respect of Human Rights
Given the recent acts of telecommunications mass surveillance where the human rights of
worldwide citizens were violated, and recalling the DO NO HARM fundamental principle,
we urge the governments of the region to respect international human rights adopted in
international law where the countries of our region are signatories.
Taking into account the topology of the network, it is imperative to make greater efforts to
respect and defend freedom of expression and privacy; avoiding censorship or selfcensorship,
arbitrary online content blocking without a order by a competent judicial
authority, decreasing Internet connection speed as a sanction, mass surveillance a order
by a competent judicial authority, and promoting the non-infringement control of such
rights by Internet service and content providers. To protect these rights it’s essential for
Civil Society to continue to supervise the State role and at the same time, for the State to
superviseprivate companies. Furthermore, to strengthen these rights protection, it is
necessary that State and Civil Society take actions to restore the trust in the Internet
ecosystem that users lost as a result of recent events.
6. Development
Our region still needs a lot of investment for development, for this reason it is necessary
to promote and encourage ICT’s that result in the desired economic development,
creating new business models; to foster the DNS industry in our region, Green ICT
development and the development of technical skills to bring responsiveness and
innovation in the event of natural disasters thus responding to incidents that affect the
stability, resilience and robustness of the network, while also reinforcing the activity of
CERT/CSIRT. In order to promote development, the region's governments should
promote tax, legal and educational incentives.
7. Participation
Regional participation in Internet Governance global spaces is still low. To increase this
participation we suggest the creation of a multistakeholder body responsible for raising
funds and its administration, with the aim to facilitate the involvement of national
representatives, from different sectors in different Internet Governance areas, ensuring
the participation on equal footing. On the other hand, we suggest to improve remote
participation in these spaces, taking into account the bandwidth requirements of the
participating users. To this end, the creation of Remote Participation Centers for each of
these meetings is needed. These Centers should be permanently available in the
languages of the region, without neglecting the creation of participation Hubs at national
level in charge of the different stakeholders. This remote participation service must meet
the accessibility requirements for an equal and inclusive participation.
We observe a lack of participation of communicators and journalists specialized and
skilled on issues of Internet Governance, which makes the message communicated not to
meet the requirements of clear, attractive, innovative, simple and friendly communication
manner for beginners and newcomers.
Another participation deficit we observe is the low presence of young people in regional
and global Internet Governance spaces. To increase this participation, we suggest looking
for new meeting formats making them attractive, innovative, creative and tailored to the
needs and expectations of the future Internet leaders.
We continue to observe that in our region there are spaces dedicated to the participation
of governments, such as ECLAC, where Civil Society is only granted the observer status.
We recommend to arbitrate the necessary measures to allow participation in an equal
footing to the different regional stakeholders in these similar spaces that still continue to
prevent a real and effective participation, especially for Civil Society Organizations.
8. Respect for the Rule of Law
Rule of law should be respected in all the activities addressed to discuss, organize and
implement actions on the future of Internet governance by all stakeholders involved. This
is in relation with the training activities mentioned above, and aimed at judicial officials,
lawyers and judges in charge of enforcing the various national, regional and international
laws related to the Internet ecosystem. Also the different stakeholders of our region,
especially our governments must assure access to digital justice and promote the
implementation of online dispute resolution mechanisms.
[1] http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats2.htm
[2] http://daccess-ddsny.
un.org/doc/RESOLUTION/GEN/G12/153/25/PDF/G1215325.pdf?OpenElement
[3] http://www.oecd.org/internet/innovation/48289796.pdf
[4] http://www.cgi.br/english/regulations/resolution2009-003.htm
[5] http://www.apc.org/en/system/files/APC_charter_EN_0.pdf
Names and Signatory Individuals and Organizations
-Gonzalo A Romero B, Colombia, Individual
-Esther Lizana , Perú, UNP
.Humberto Carrasco, Chile, ADI - Chile
-Aída Noblia, Uruguay, Asociación de Escribanos del Uruguay
-Roxana Laura Goldstein, Argentina , Individual
-Edna Samudio, Panamá, ISOC Panamá (en formación)
-Francisco Vera, Chile, ONG Derechos Digitales
-Pilar Saenz, Colombia, Fundación Karisma
-Julian Casasbuenas G., Colombia, Colnodo
-Dafne Sabanes Plou, Argentina, individual
-Jose Arce, Argentina, Individual
-Joao Carlos Caribe, Brazil, Movimento Mega
-AHM Bazlur Rahman, Bangladesh, Bangladesh NGOs Network for Radio &
Communication
-Jorge Gonzalez, Venezuela, UCLA
-Maritza Aguero, Peru , Individual
-Martín Porras, Perú, REDEM: Red Educativa Mundial
-Juan Manuel Rojas, Colombia, AGEIA DENSI Colombia
-Antonio Medina Gomez, Colombia, Asociación Colombiana de Usuarios de Internet
-Alfredo Velazco, Ecuador, Usuarios Digitales - @UsuariosDigital
-Raitme Citterio, Venezuela, Isoc Venezuela
-Mauro Cambronero, Argentina, Individual
-Gonzalo López Peña, Argentina, Ageia Densi
-Franco Moya, Argentina, AGEIA DENSI
-Marcela Tintilay, Argentina, Individual
-Carlos Dionisio Aguirre, Argentina, AGEIA DENSI - ADIAR
-Sergio Salinas Porto Argentina, Asociación Argentina de Usuarios de Internet (Internauta
Argentina)
-Juan Parada, Colombia, UNAD
-Yenny Villalba, Paraguay, POJOAJU
-José Huerta, Chile, ONG Cívico
-Nicolas Caballero, Paraguay , ISOC-Paraguay
-Paula Penagos, Colombia, Población Civil
-Encel Sanchez, Venezuela, Universidad de Los Andes
-Adrian Quesada Rodriguez, Costa Rica, Universidad de Costa Rica
-Cynthia SOLIS, México, Ageia Densi México
-Maricarmen Sequera, Paraguay, TEDIC.org
-Natalia Enciso, Paraguay, APADIT
-Israel Rosas R., México, Individual
-Fatima Cambronero, Argentina, AGEIA DENSI Argentina
-Javier Pallero , Argentina, AGEIA DENSI Argentina