Poland’s food for thought on Internet governance aspects in the
pre-Sao Paulo discussions1.
1. Poland welcomes the convening by Brazil of the Global
Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance to
Sao Paulo in April 2014. We support the effort to craft globally
accepted Internet Governance Principles and propose a Roadmap for
the further evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem
(Roadmap) and consider it a timely and important event in the
global process of Internet governance. The meeting’s legitimacy will
be dependent on acquiring a genuine and wide support and
involvement of a truly multistakeholder environment. In that context
we share the European Commission’s and many countries’ view, that
the failure of the Sao Paulo Meeting would risk projecting Internet
governance issues back into the intergovernmental fora and
organizations, threatening the multistakeholder model.
2. Poland feels however that there should be no question about the
ultimate objective of this global exercise. Irrespective of which forum
along the way the multistakeholder community convenes to
network, the principal goal to pursue is the unfragmented Internet
which should stay free, innovative and open. A globally accepted set
of principles should serve as a means to that end. Poland believes
that this is a task for the stakeholders to effectively participate in the
development of such principles. They should constitute the
underlying basis in any discussions or any related framework of
Internet governance. In this light the Sao Paulo meeting becomes
particularly useful.
3. Poland, inspired by the objectives listed in the Internet Governance
Council of Europe Strategy 2012-20152 and having in mind the
ultimate goal of the free, innovative, open and unfragmented
Internet, believes that the Internet Governance Principles as well as
the Roadmap must respect and protect core values and features of
Internet such as:
? privacy of Internet users;
? open and free technical standards and protocols;
? human rights and freedoms of Internet users, in particular
freedom of speech, access to information and prohibition of
preventive censorship;
? net neutrality and technological neutrality of the Internet
infrastructure;
? the Internet’s potential to promote democracy and cultural
diversity;
1 Poland continues its active involvement in discussions on Internet governance
advocating for a multistakeholder approach. See Polish EU PRESIDENCY PAPER: Internet
Governance Forum, 27-30 September 2011 Nairobi, Kenya
2 CM(2011)175 final
4. The same rights that people enjoy offline must also be protected
online. Poland believes that these values have a unique power of
ensuring inclusiveness for all stakeholders.
5. Building on the Internet Governance Council of Europe Strategy
2012-20153 Poland strongly advocates applying the method of
“doing no harm” to the operational aspects of the Internet as we
know it. Any policy, action or decision, both at the national and
global level, pertaining to the Internet, should be subjected to the
“do no harm” test with criteria based on the above mentioned
values and features of the Internet. Although the Council of Europe
Strategy introduces the “do no harm” principle only to ensure the
application of the European Convention on Human Rights in the
online environment, the application of this rule should be extended
to encompass all values and features of the Internet as mentioned in
previous point.
6. The Sao Paulo Roadmap should respect basic requirements for
strengthening the multistakeholder model, as stated in the latest
Commission Communication on Internet governance4, the main of
which being: transparency of the process, inclusiveness and
balance involving a reasonable effort to reach out to all parties
impacted by a given topic, and holding respective bodies
accountable to all involved in multistakeholder process for actions
taken.
7. It can be assumed that one of the main points of the Roadmap will
be the question of globalization of the ICANN and IANA functions.
This issue has been raised in the Montevideo Statement on the
Future of Internet Cooperation, where leaders of so called technical
organizations, among others issues, called for accelerating the
globalization of ICANN and IANA functions, towards an environment
in which all stakeholders participate on an equal footing. Poland also
shares the concern that delegating IANA functions to ICANN through
a contractual relationship with a single country raises issues
pertaining to inadequate accountability, a lack of transparency and
unbalanced stakeholder influence. Thus Poland will support efforts to
provide for globalization of ICANN and IANA functions within the
scope of the Roadmap.
8. The Roadmap should make a full use of the well-established
frameworks of multistakeholder dialogue, in particular by giving
proper recognition to the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), with a
3 CM(2011)175 final
4 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions Internet
Policy and Governance Europe's role in shaping the future of Internet Governance
COM(2014) 72/4
view to turning it into an outcome-oriented body. The results of the
Working Group on Improvements to IGF offer valuable ideas in this
respect.
9. Poland remains strongly committed to the multistakeholder model of
Internet governance, and thus welcomes and anticipates any
improvements to the ongoing process, as long as these changes
adhere to the principles of multistakeholderism set out above. One
of the tools strengthening the multistakeholder model is an
extensive use of technology allowing remote participation in
meetings and in decision-making process, helping organizations and
entities, especially from developing countries, to get involved. Truly
multistakeholder model is open and public in nature so all forums
and meetings that address issues related to Internet should be open
to broad participation of all stakeholders.