JPNIC's contribution to NETmundial
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Shigeki Goto
Region: Japan
Organization: Japan Network Information Center (JPNIC)
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: pragmatism, well-informed, verifiability, catalyst
Abstract
Regarding Internet Governance Principles, JPNIC suggests "pragmatism", "well-informed
decision based on evidence" and "verifiability" especially important among a number of
principles which are considered important.Regarding the further evolution, JPNIC
suggests to have a new role which catalyzes enhanced cooperation among entities which
have been responsively handling Internet Governance issues in their respective areas in
order to address complex and emerging issues.
Document
Section 1. Internet Governance PrinciplesThere are a number of principles which are
considered to be important for Internet governance. From those principles, we would like
to submit the following principles which we believe are especially important:The first is
pragmatism. As expressed by the widely quoted phrase in the Internet Technical
Community “We believe in rough consensus and running code” which is described in Tao
of IETF, internet technical standards are developed by requiring standards which actually
are able to operate, accepting the existence of multiple standards, as well as by leaving
the choice and its deployment to users of such standards. This has successfully
suppressed unrealistic specifications to be standardized, and is achieving development of
pragmatic standards. For stakeholders affected by policies, it is important not only in
technical spheres but also in policy spheres that policies to be developed are
pragmatic.The second is well-informed decision based on evidence. In either technical or
political spheres, the issues of the Internet Governance are specialized in many cases
and often require highly expertized knowledge in making judgment. Therefore, it is
important that people with high expertise make considerations based on various
evidences. In addition, in cases where people without expertise are involved in making a
judgment, they should make judgments based on the experts’ consideration with
evidence.The last is verifiability of policy deliberation process. In the tradition of the
Internet, anyone can verify discussions and decisions made in policy or standard
development process , as materials, proposals and discussion to develop policies or
standards are recorded and are made publicly available. This accommodates dynamic
and timely discussions to adjust to rapid changes in technological advancement and
markets, while at the same time, enables to make modifications as needed by later
reviewing the discussions, including the adequacy of the discussions process. This is
important for further evolution of the policy process for the Internet for the future.Section
2. Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
The Internet Governance as a whole covers a wide range of issues, ranging from
technical developments to public policies. In developing standards and policies for these
issues, there are various entities responsible for a particular area of the issues, and they
are engaged in working on issues which are under their responsibilities, based on their
expertise.While the existing entities have been handling issues in their respective areas
successfully until today, it is possible to have a complex set of issues or new issues to
arise as the Internet becomes increasingly sophisticated.To deal with such issues
effectively, and to maximize the expertize which has been built by each entity until today,
there may be a need to have a new function catalyzing among each of the entities, to
coordinate collaborative efforts and enable a coordinated set to multiple activities, which
address complex and emerging issues. We believe it is important for each entity to
pursue further efforts in its respective areas of responsibilities, and through clarifications
of role of each entity, respect and make good use of expertise of other entities. In order to
find new approach of addressing emerging issues which cannot be fully covered by each
entity’s expertise, the catalyst function will be needed, as well as enhancement of highlevel
cooperation among these entities.