The Korean Government s Submission for ETmundia1 
Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning 
Republic of Korea 
The formidable influence of a globally interconnected Internet in all aspects of our society has raised great concerns on the issue of global Internet governance and the Republic of Korea welcomes this opportunity to participate in a global cooperative discussion regarding this very important issue. 
As a country leading the world in cutting-edge Internet technologies. the Republic of Korea perceives global Internet governance issues as one of the most important issues facing our global community The 2013 Conference on Cyberspace that we hosted in Seoul last October highlighted the growing importance of cyberspace as well as the need to strengthen international cooperation in order to achieve overall development for the human society throu2h an open and secure cyberspace. 

We would like to express our sincere appreciation to the Brazilian government for taking the initiative in providing opportunity for the various stakeholders of the world to get together to share our views on the Future of Internet Governance. We hope our contributions will be instrumental in developing a model of global Internet governance that will enrich the lives of global citizens. 
The tremendous development of the global Internet was made possible by the collective efforts of the various stakeholders in their respective roles adapting to changes in the technological and societal environment. The private sector and the technical community have played important roles in the development and accessibility of a global Internet network and civil societies have made efforts to emphasize the rights as well as responsibilities of the individual users of the Internet. Individual governments have also been committed to the establishment of an efficient domestic network and service while exerting efforts to contribute to the international advancement of the Internet. 
Recent global security issues that threaten the rights of the various stakeholders have prompted the urgency for the stakeholders to share their views on the issue of global Internet governance. Existing discussions on the rights and responsibilities of the information society. Internet governance and Internet policy making processes provide us with a general common ground in their declarations’, and the Republic of Korea would like to suggest that the 

1 Declaration of Principles. World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). Geneva 2003. Turns Agenda for the Information Society. Report of the Working Group on Internet Governance (WGIG). CGI.br Principles for the Governance and Use of the Internet. OECD Principles for Internet Policy-making. Council of Europe Declaration by the Committee of Ministers on Internet Governance Principles. UN Joint Declaration Concerning the Internet(2011). Internet Rights and Principles Coalitions Chapter of Human Rights for the Internet. UNGA/Res/67/195, Seoul Framework adopted at Seoul Conference on Cyberspace20l3 

following principles be considered in developing consensus regarding global Internet governance. 
(Accessibility) The global and open nature of the Internet is a driving force in accelerating progress towards development iii its various forms. Access to the Internet must be universal. and the accessibility to a secure and open Internet must be ensured. 
(Multistakeholderism) Discussions on Internet governance need to involve the participation of all interested stakeholders. including governments. the private sector. technical community. civil society. academia and international organizations in a democratic manner. The multistakeholder process must be truly inclusive and equitable. Further efforts are needed to hilly embrace the global community. particularly the stakeholders lacking sufficient representation in the current Internet governance discussion. 
(Flexibility) Discussions on Internet governance should consider more than one single approach or solution. Further. considering the evolving nature of the Internet ecosystem. issues and the approaches to address them should be taken on a case-by-case and area- tailored basis. Continued efforts need to be made to identify the best possible solutions that keep pace with changes in the economy. society and technology. 

(Engagement) To build a reliable and legitimate governance mechanism that wins support from all stakeholders. decision-making processes in the scope of Internet governance need to be based on global cooperation among all stakeholders. rather than intermittent, temporary and sector-specific efforts. 
(Security) All stakeholders should assume responsibility to enhance the security of information technologies. Efforts should be made to reach a common understanding on Internet security related issues. and to cooperate to collect and disseminate security-related information and exchange good practices among all stakeholders on measures to combat cyber security threats. In addition. to ensure a stable and sustainable development of the Internet. efforts should be continuously made to build consensus on the norms on cyberspace. 
(Balance) Capacity building programs need to be expanded in order to increase access to the Internet as a public good and to prevent the unintended consequences of the Internet. It is important to bring the Internet to a wider audience. including developing countries with low penetration. countries with limited or no access to the Internet. and the underserved. and to raise the awareness of the Internet among these stakeholders. while providing support to narrow the digital divide. 
The Republic of Korea is strongly committed to an open and secure global Internet based on the principles of multistakeholder participation. Being able to arrive at a consensus on an international level is an essential element in securing the legitimacy of mechanisms devised to realize such principles. We hope that NETmundial will provide the opportunity for all the stakeholders to converge on important principles and mechanisms to build a global Internet for the advancement of all human societies. 
