DSCI Submission on Roadmap for the Further Evolution of
Internet Governance Ecosystem
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Rahul Sharma
Region: India
Organization: Data Security Council of India (DSCI)
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Internet Governance ICT Multistakeholder DNS
Abstract
The proposition, if diligently implemented, would help evolve global Internet Governance
model and help formulate a solution acceptable to all the stakeholders, building pros of
multi-stakeholder model whilst suggesting practical and amicable solutions that can
resolve IG issues. Data Security Council of India promises to actively participate in the
global dialogue in reforming current IG model.
Document
Data Security Council of India (DSCI) proposes a roadmap for further evolution of the
Internet Governance model to ensure a single interoperable Internet. Steps are:
1. A multi stakeholder model with defined roles of relevant stakeholders on all matters
needs to be evolved. The conference should ensure participation that is
proportional to Internet population. Topics and issues, be it policy, technical or
administrative, where representation of a set of stakeholders is mere ceremonial
and not participatory, should not act as bottleneck in effective decision making.
2. Global governance norms be evolved that separate DNS maintenance from policies
on TLDs, as well as public policies that intersect with nations’ rights to make them.
3. Industry’s participation from developing countries in standards making be ensured
by changes such as making IETF open without having to pay for seat in committees
and the Board (as is the current practice).
4. For ICT sector to flourish, and contribute more to socio economic development,
propositions such as localization of ICT within territorial boundaries of regions etc.
should not be encouraged.
5. Effective participation of stakeholders from developing and least developed
economies should be encouraged and facilitated, with focus on capacity building.
6. National governments role in law and order, content regulation and national security
within their territories be accepted; else international clashes will continue.
7. Countries should be asked to send nominees of all stakeholders, rather than ICANN
directly selecting people without any transparency.
Given that all stakeholders (including all nation states) would not effectively be
represented in the Netmundial meeting, and the committees that have been formed do not
ensure adequate representation of right set of stakeholders, DSCI views it as a platform
that can carry forward the dialogue on evolving Internet governance model that is
currently underway at numerous platforms. Further, the outcome of the meeting can be
used as platform to further propose solutions that can be considered by global community
to evolve Internet Governance model.
About DSCI
DSCI is a focal body on data protection in India, set-up as an independent Self Regulatory
Organization (SRO) by NASSCOM®, to promote data protection, develop security and
privacy best practices & standards and encourage the Indian industries to implement the
same.
DSCI is engaged with the Indian IT/BPM industry, their clients worldwide, Banking and
Telecom sectors, industry associations, data protection authorities and other government
agencies in different countries. It conducts industry wide surveys and publishes reports,
organizes data protection awareness seminars, workshops, projects, interactions and
other necessary initiatives for outreach and public advocacy. DSCI is focused on capacity
building of Law Enforcement Agencies for combating cyber crimes in the country and
towards this; it operates several cyber labs across India to train police officers,
prosecutors and judicial officers in cyber forensics.
Public Advocacy, Thought Leadership, Awareness and Outreach and Capacity Building
are the key words with which DSCI continues to promote and enhance trust in India as a
secure global sourcing hub, and promotes data protection in the country.