Contribution to NETmundial
São Paulo, 23, 24 - April 2014
Registries (TLDs),
entreprises of cognition
in the 21st century

1. Shocking regional disparities
Communication networks are intended to improve trade and living conditions for humans on
the entire planet. The Internet globalization can help provide unprecedented opportunities for
development and welfare but only if we preserve and promote cultural diversity, freedom
and human rights.
In this spirit, it is legitimate to compare, in each country, the investments in new TLDs to the
demographic weight of the country. This provides, for each country, a commitment rate in
the ICANN policy of new TLDs. Review of applications show that :
- The number of projected TLDs in South America (24) and Africa (17) are very low, while
the two continents are growing fast in the area of information and communication
technologies. Without a drastic rebalancing to their advantage, given the role of time in the
networks economy, these two continents are doomed to be consumers of dominant firms for
yet a decade at least.
- The analysis of the numbers of projects in North America (915) and Europe (671) reveals
that actually almost half of the so called European projects are managed by companies from
the United States. This brings down the number of truly European projects to 352, that is to
say, almost as Asia-Pacific (303). The USA therefore total more than 1200 applications on
1930, that is nearly 2/3 of the investments in TLDs projects. Added to this are the technical
backend services for which 11 U.S. companies cover 3/4 of the bids for TLDs.
The final distribution after selection between competitors for the same TLDs cannot
significantly reduce the domination of the US companies. This excessive domination is
dangerous because it can only generate withdrawals from the so called "One Net" and sow
animosity. It carries monoculture instead of diversity. Finally, it exposes the majority of the
users in the world to data collection and espionage in a questionable legal framework (USA
Patriot Act, FISA Amendments Act of 2008 etc.)
2. Tax evasion on a large scale
All the TLDs projects of U.S. companies in Europe are located in areas well known as "tax
havens": European micro-States (152) and the British Caribbean Islands (167).
European areas of low taxation, well known to allow sophisticated tax evading organizations,
as the Netherlands, Ireland and Switzerland, have attracted a higher proportion of
European projects that other European states having average or strong tax levels.
In the United States, a large proportion of projects are established in the State of Delaware, at
the expense of the population of the United States.
This systematic tax avoidance is possible because of legal facility offered to establish a
business in a country but to choose another country as the place for tax.

The above table is attached as a file named TLD_Mundo.pdf
3. Issues of global public interest
Practices of tax evasion on a large scale will remain possible as long as there will remain at
least ONE complacent micro-state and that it will be lawful to separate place of business and

fiscal establishment. It is much easy for registries as they don't require significant physical
installations.
More importantly perhaps is the moral factor, the psychological one. The naming operators
are readily hostile to states, anti-parliamentary and deeply suspicious of the political class.
Fiscal forcing solutions could be ineffective.
Public officials as well as private entrepreneurs cannot ignore the risks facing the planet and
human populations. The Naming and Internet ecosystem cannot evolve in a bubble,
sheltered from global risks and ignoring them: global warming, environmental degradation
critical inevitable migration, growth of cities, overcrowding with lacking education and
health, explosive growth of inequalities etc.
4. Apparently conflicting approaches may converge
Respecting the different sensitivities, it seems possible to make converge within the
ecosystem of naming, conventional approaches to public policy with liberal
philanthropic initiatives. Designating common goals can enable very heterogeneous entities
to work in the same direction.
In economic terms, the tax evasion practices distort competition since many 'normal'
companies, usually small and medium enterprises, do not seek to evade taxes and contribute
to the collective efforts of their compatriots.
In line with the Public Interest Commitments (PIC) introduced by ICANN in the management
of applications for new TLDs, it could be introduced a policy of social and environmental
responsibility. Each registry residing in an area where the tax is lower than the global
average would face an alternative :
- Either to withdraw its declaration of tax residence and return to its real country of
establishment,
- Either to exercise its social and environmental responsibility by a financial contribution to
projects of global public interest, without going through a national taxation.
5. A Sustainable Responsible Business Committee (SRBC)
The rules for calculating minimum contributions could be determined annually by an
independent commission called for example Sustainable Responsible Business Committee
(SRBC). .
Companies would be free to contribute beyond the amount calculated by the SRBC. And
other businesses already taxed in their respective countries could also participate, if they wish,
on a purely voluntary basis. A global hall of fame of the contributors would be published
and maintained. Attendance on this list could become for companies a communication
argument and this could create a virtuous circle.
The global average used as a reference could be the average tax within countries hosting
registries, weighted by the number of registries.
6. Make actors of the ecosystem become entrepreneurs of cognition in the 21st century

Financial contributions collected by the SRBC would be allocated to priority projects. Their
list would be established and maintained by the SRBC. Companies could affect their
contributions to projects of their choice among three categories:
- Rebalancing the global distribution of TLDs,
- Basic training in computing for young children worldwide,
- Visualization of data on major global issues.
So companies of the naming ecosystem could play a full role of cognition companies in the
21st century.
References :
Governance of Top Level Domains (TLDs): a failed revolution?
Dominique Lacroix, in Proceedings,
1st International Conference on Internet Science,
Brussels, April 9-11, 2013, pages 133 à 141
L’ICANN obligée d’inventer une alchimie des noms de domaines,
ICANN is obliged to invent an alchemy for domain names
Dominique Lacroix, Le Monde.fr, 23 avril 2013
http://reseaux.blog.lemonde.fr/2013/04/23/icann-alchimie-noms-domaines/
Ranger la Terre
Le nommage des domaines est-il l’expression d’une stratégie des USA de domination des
réseaux ?
Tidying the Earth
Is Internet naming a piece of the American dominance cyberstrategy?
in Proceedings of the Symposium "Networks and e-strategy" organized by Olivier Kempf in
Paris in May 2013, to be published by Editions Economica