Internet Governance Principles
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Beatriz Rodriguez
Region: Uruguay
Organization: ERS Consultores
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Principles, Access, Neutrality, Privacy, Freedom
Abstract
We represent part of this multistakeholder model and we would like to express our
gratitude for the opportunity to deliver our comments in preparation of the meeting.Internet
has evolved over the course of the last decades due to the development of technology,
the information society and communication. As a result enhance and maintain knowledge,
and accept the multistakeholder model level of government, civil society, business and
academia this net continuous to grow.
Document
Abstract
We represent part of this multistakeholder model and we would like to express our
gratitude for the opportunity to deliver our comments in preparation of the meeting.
Internet has evolved over the course of the last decades due to the development of
technology, the information society and communication. As a result enhance and maintain
knowledge, and accept the multistakeholder model level of government, civil society,
business and academia this net continuous to grow.
Document
Internet Governance Principles
Internet has evolved over the course of the last decades due to the development of
technology, the information society and communication. As a result enhance and maintain
knowledge, and accept the multistakeholder model level of government, civil society,
business and academia this net continuous to grow.
However with the development of the Internet, where it coexist public activity and private,
the application of various principles is necessary. The principles that have different levels
of management depending on the social and economic stage where countries are.
We believe that the principles of departure for the development of Internet should be
already existing text, but we think that the following principles are those should deepen:
- The access to Internet: this principle includes the possibility to choose the software and
the system, to warrant the digital inclusion, the neutrality and equality of the net.
- Freedom and equality in Internet: the persons have the right to be secure and trusted in
the net, without ciberbullyng, grooming, identity theft, data protection, and others crimes.
In addition to the crimes all the persons have the right to access a good services and
protocols.
- Freedom of expression and information: this principle is basic to communication and
evolves the persons through the net.
- Privacy of Internet: we need to develop this principle because this is a right that people
have offline, and must also be protected online.
There are several principles that have been studied by large organizations such as the
OECD, but we believe that these are to be further explored.