Towards Enhancing Multi-stakeholderism For All
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Nizar Zakka
Region: Iran
Organization: Persian IGF
Sector: Other
Keywords: PersianIGF, Persian MAG, P-MAG, P-IGF, Multi-stakeholderism
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
Abstract Internet governance literature emphasizes the importance of multistakeholderism.
However, it is unclear how this can be achieved in regions lacking
developed stakeholder groups or stakeholder groups independent of state authority. This
is a challenge that reaches many countries, including small island states. It is an
opportunity that should be recognized, and supported in Internet Governance initiatives.
This proposal highlights the role of Internet governance and capacity building initiatives in
empowering the growth of informed multi stakeholder groups in such regions as well as
empowering individuals to take part in multi-stakeholder processes.As NETMundial
Conference is discussing principles, and evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem,
sensitivities that recognize the unique situation of certain countries in the evolution and
emergence of stakeholders should be taken into account.
Document
Internet Governance Initiatives: Towards Enhancing Multi-stakeholderism For All
Abstract
Internet governance literature emphasizes the importance of multi-stakeholderism.
However, it is unclear how this can be achieved in regions lacking developed stakeholder
groups or stakeholder groups independent of state authority. This is a challenge that
reaches many countries, including small island states. It is an opportunity that should be
recognized, and supported in Internet Governance initiatives. This proposal highlights
the role of Internet governance and capacity building initiatives in empowering the growth
of informed multi stakeholder groups in such regions as well as empowering individuals to
take part in multi-stakeholder processes.
As NETMundial Conference is discussing principles, and evolution of the Internet
Governance Ecosystem, sensitivities that recognize the unique situation of certain
countries in the evolution and emergence of stakeholders should be taken into account.
Persian IGF Background:
The Persian Internet Governance Forum (PersianIGF) was launched by IJMA3 and
Tehran ICT Guild (TIG) in 2013. Its purpose is to provide a multi-stakeholder venue where
different stakeholder groups discuss and exchange information, viewpoints and ideas
about current and emerging Internet governance issues. PersianIGF is a thematic forum
and strives to reach out to the Persian speaking community in Afghanistan, Iran and
Tajikistan as well as the Persian speaking diaspora in other countries.
Roadmap for the Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
Internet governance literature advocates the use of a multi-stakeholder model. It is one of
the main means for maintaining an open Internet which facilitates social, cultural, and
economic development. However, multi-stakeholderism is in its infancy especially in
developing countries. Many developing countries striving to democratize their processes
have established state-centric approaches. The existence of different stakeholders may
be in various stages of evolution in many countries. Introducing new models of
governance may need discussion and examination to create understanding and
awareness.
In such regions, civil society and other non-state actors, including business, NGOs, etc.
may be just emerging, or simply yet to make their interest in articipation in a multistakeholder
process known. This creates unique challenges that must start with
awareness and outreach. Care should be taken to enable weak and fragile stakeholder
groups to contribute to global collaboration on Internet governance decision making. In
the absence of such stakeholder groups, representative expert individuals should be
afforded the opportunity to participate in the Internet governance process.
Capacity building programs, regional, national and thematic Internet governance initiatives
can help with enhancing the experts’ and stakeholder groups’ abilities to participate in
these processes. Just as the Internet connects the world, such initiatives connect truly
global constituencies to the important work of Internet governance. Their voices are
important but it is the responsibility of the wider multi-stakeholder community to help them
become engaged, and supported in participation.
Enhancing the voice of new and emerging stakeholder groups and individuals in Internet
governance especially helps developing countries to participate in and benefit from
economic and social opportunities that the Internet provides. The Internet is a means for
social change and economic growth and the multi-stakeholder Internet governance is a
key tool for its realization.
Multi-stakeholders governance cannot be truly implemented when the stakeholder groups
representation criteria is vague. This would lead to weakening the regional and national
actors and create a power imbalance
Evolution of new participants in stakeholder groups:
Flexible procedural mechanisms that can identify the stakeholder groups and their
representatives and bring onboard new participants should continue to be a core activity
to strengthen the IGF. Awareness of the need to create and support such mechanisms
will benefit the IGF, and also different regional and national Internet governance
initiatives. The procedures however should be flexible to preserve the evolution of
stakeholder groups and Internet governance and maintain its inclusiveness.
Some of the core characteristics of the procedures are as follows:
· The stakeholder groups are divided into governments, private sector, academics,
technical community, civil society and international organizations. [1] While this has been
an accepted categorization it can also limit diversity and equal participation in Internet
governance process. When a stakeholder group is weak in certain region the more
flexible procedures could address this issue by recognizing the limitations and looking for
other existing actors that Internet governance have an impact on their social and
economic development. This may also lead to the evolution of the broadening of the
general categorization of stakeholder groups.
· Procedural mechanisms that are implemented in global Internet governance
initiatives should address the issue of power imbalance between national, regional and
international stakeholder groups’ representatives. The procedures should truly give the
stage to all the actors equally. This is especially important for the regional and national
private actors and civil society actors in developing countries that may have less access
to resources in order to take part in the process.
· Allowing expert individuals to take part in the process without having to select a
stakeholder group may represent an innovation that should be piloted in the upcoming
IGF in Turkey, but also may be welcomed in national and regional IGF initiatives. This in
the long term may result in the evolution of stakeholder groups and also allows for those
countries that cannot relate to the main categorization of the general stakeholder groups
to participate in the process. Moreover, it prevents non-genuine affiliation of organizations
and individuals to specific stakeholder groups or multiple stakeholder groups.
· The Internet governance initiatives and other entities should consider the best
practices that are used in emerging countries for empowering different stakeholder
groups.
Openness, Economic Development and Multi-Stakeholder Fora
Maintaining an open, interconnected, and interoperable Internet is crucial for social,
cultural, and economic development. Internet governance ecosystem should be able to
efficiently maintain the openness of the Internet and consciously consider social and
economic development as key goals. Strengthening the multistakeholder model in Internet
governance eco system can support this. However, multi-stakeholder model should not
only consider the global, regional and national Internet governance issues, but should
also consider diverse viewpoints that cannot be categorized under the geographical
indications. The openness of the Internet should not be a motto; concrete action plans
should be drafted and implemented to achieve utmost openness of the Internet through a
multi-stakeholder governance model.
For the upcoming NETMundial, the PersianIGF Initiative wishes to acknowledge the
communication from the IGF MAG, that both noted the NETMundial Conference, and also
supports welcoming inputs from the NETMundial Conference, along with other inputs, to
report on and discuss their work at the IGF 2014 in Instanbul.
Thank you for this opportunity to provide inputs into the NETMundial Conference.
[1] TUNIS AGENDA FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, WSIS 05/TUNIS/DOC/6(Rev.
1)-E, 2005.