Document

ISOC Tunisia thanks the Brazilian government, CGI.br, and the Executive Multistakeholder Committee for the opportunity to participate in the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance.

 

The Internet and the World Wide Web have generated an unprecedented explosion in commerce and creativity. According to a May 2011 study by the McKinsey Global Institute (“Internet Matters: The net’s sweeping impact on growth, jobs, and prosperity”), nearly eight trillion dollars of online commerce occurs each year through e-commerce. The same report states that the Internet accounts for 21 percent of gross domestic product growth in the last five years in mature countries, and that the benefits are not reserved for Internet companies – in fact, 75 percent of Internet economic impact benefits companies that are not pure Internet players. A March 2012 report by the Boston Consulting Group – entitled “The Internet Economy in the G-20:  The $4.2 Trillion Growth Opportunity” – provides policy makers more data about the impact of the Internet on economic growth and job creation. According to the report, Internet-savvy small- and medium-sized enterprises (SME) across eleven of the G-20 countries have experienced 22 percent higher revenue growth over the last three years than comparable businesses with no Internet usage. The report also found that SMEs that have an Internet presence generate more jobs. In Germany, for example, 93 percent of companies that were heavy users of the Internet and web services increased employment over the past three years, compared with only 50 percent of their offline competitors.

 

Despite the significant positive impact of the Internet on the world’s economy, this transformative technology stands at a crossroads. Some governments want to replace the existing multi-stakeholder model of Internet governance, through which governments, civil society, industry, the engineering community, and users all recognize a shared responsibility and role in the continued advancement of the Internet. These governments instead are advancing a regulatory approach that strengthens their role at the expense of other stakeholders -- effectively excluding those who have conceptualized, built, operated, and contributed to the Internet’s success.

 

The entire Internet community -- including governments, businesses, civil society, academic and technical experts, and individual users -- must continue working together if we want the Internet to remain an open, vibrant platform for innovation, growth, and the free exchange of ideas, and if we want to expand the reach of this technology to those who remain unconnected