Towards Reform of Global Internet Technical Framework
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Rishab Bailey
Region: India and Brasil
Organization: The Society for Knowledge Commons
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: encryption, decentralisation, open source, social platforms
Abstract
In addition to mass surveillance, principles and governance structures are required to
address the monopolization and commodification of information and knowledge; abusive
use of personal data - in particular its unchecked monetization, the erosion of cultural
diversity, the concentration of power in the hands of one state and technical decisions that
lead to social injustice. While policy and legal frameworks are required to ensure a
reformed and internationalized Internet, many of the solutions for the future of Internet
governance are technical, and without a technical grounding many of the policy and legal
frameworks might be meaningless.
Document
Knowledge Commons appreciates the opportunity to present a submission on the
technical architecture that will be required for a more democratic Internet to the Global
Multi-stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance. While policy and legal
frameworks are the principle focus of the NetMundial meeting, many of the solutions for
the future of Internet governance are technical, and without a technical grounding many of
the policy and legal frameworks might be meaningless.
As an organization that includes technology specialists, we offer the following
observations and recommendations on the understanding that good engineering and
technical solutions will require political and social support.
The technological architecture that worked when the Internet was born and grew in its
infancy is in many ways outdated. The impetus for the NetMundial arose because trust
and confidence in the Internet was fundamentally undermined by mass surveillance and
economic espionage, both possible because of the Internet’s technical architecture.
Leaving current practices, protocols and infrastructure unchanged poses risks to the
privacy of citizens, the capacity of governments to engage with one another in trust, and
the ability of the financial system to function. Therefore there is a need to alter the
technical architecture of the Internet.
1. The future growth of the Internet needs to emphasize decentralized architecture
and more evenly distributed infrastructure
Decentralization and distribution of network architecture is needed to improve the storage
and privacy of data.
The Internet’s infrastructure of copper, fiber optic cable and satellite communications is
global and often described as a decentralized network of networks. However, the bulk of
global voice and Internet traffic passes through the territory or company servers of one
country and is subject to its laws.
This centralization of ownership and control of physical cables, routers, servers and data
is at the core of the problem’s made clear by the revelations of Edward Snowden; if all the
data is going through a single location it is vulnerable to the back doors in software and
hardware utilized by agencies of that country. Scholars have described this as
‘governance by architecture’ or ‘governance by design’.
The global north currently owns the cloud and most of the fiber optic cable. Countries in
the global south should be encouraged to aggressively lay their own cables and generate
domestic cloud capacities, to protect privacy and encourage local innovation and
competition via architecture.
The question of being connected is urgent for 5 billion people currently not enjoying
access to the Internet. However, connecting them with the most polluted tools, storing
data and applications in locations unknown and routing data through jurisdictions that do
not guarantee their rights will simply magnify the privacy and security problems currently
experienced by the 2 billion people online.
Naming systems are essential for the Internet to work, but the current naming system is
hierarchical and gives control to entities in control of this hierarchy. Control over the
naming system has led some parties to illegally take over domain names without due
process.
2. Free and Open Source Software and Hardware without backdoors
When we do not know what our machines are doing and what is on our motherboards, we
cannot have communication and services that uphold our universal human rights to
privacy, freedom of expression and association. To ensure that, software and hardware
should be fully auditable and interoperable. Only Free and Open Software and Hardware
implementing Open Standards can give us the chance to stop the backdoors, allowing
complete auditability and interoperability.
An open and decentralized Internet requires strict enforcement of open and public
standards, which allow fully interoperable implementation by anyone in any type of
software and hardware. The trend towards privatization of digital standards must be
stemmed and measures must be introduced to ensure that standards are publicly owned,
freely accessible and implementable.
The applications and protocols necessary for a connected life must be free and open
source. These include operating systems, mobile phones basebands, distributed data
storage, email clients, instant messaging and video/voice communication. User friendly
and affordable technical solutions need to be made available to individuals and
governments. A strong responsibility lies with technologists and their industries to provide
more user friendly, easy to run solutions and options for secure communications.
The long-term solutions, particularly hardware production, requires enormous human and
economic resources, but every citizen will benefit from free software and open hardware
that is verifiably safe and based on architectures that does not give power to a central or
single entity.
3. Private social platforms put users at risk, and compromise local interests
Commercial social media platforms displaced the open distributed systems that made up
the original applications used on the Internet, rather than platforms based on open
protocols like email, Usenet, IRC etc. People communicate on sites like Facebook and
Twitter and rather than hosting media on their own web servers, with domains under their
control, they use sites like YouTube and SoundCloud. The commercial nature of these
companies means that collecting data on their users is required for them to make profits.
These are global north based companies with a market position that allows them to
dominate global markets, thereby squeezing out local alternatives and collecting massive
amounts of data on citizens of other countries without regulatory oversight.
Public funding was necessary to build out key infrastructure like the telephone system and
the railways, and public funds continue to support local culture in many countries by way
of supporting public broadcasting on TV and radio, and provides funding for local film and
arts. In order for a free Internet to be developed for the best interests of local citizens and
local business, public funds will need to support development of tools that will give users
alternatives to the social media monopolies. These applications and tools must be open
and distributed on nature, and designed to protect the users privacy.
4. Strong encryption must be mandatory in all core protocols
There are a large number of core protocols that currently have strong cryptography added
as an afterthought, if at all, and frequently have optional insecure fallback modes, which
can be in various cases coerced by an attacker. Many protocols containing sensitive
information are communicated in the clear, and many protocols requiring validation of
authenticity are sent without any such authentication, making fake identity attacks trivial.
To guarantee that citizens have their privacy protected, all cryptographic libraries used in
the core protocols should be open and frequently verified, so that their implementations
will be safe for global usage.
5. There is a difference between what is technically possible and what is legal or
acceptable – new agreements will require trust and technical verification
This difference is recognized in International Humanitarian Law – the laws of war – where
indiscriminate weapons and torture are outlawed. New treaty agreements – or additional
protocols to existing treaties – are needed to apply similar limits to online activities, to
elaborate rights and prohibit certain acts.
Existing treaties, human rights and trade instruments oblige governments to secure data,
protect citizen’s human rights to privacy and freedom of expression, and to not spy on
each other’s citizens. These treaties all recognize that there are legitimate surveillance
activities and actors, and provide a license for them to act with proper oversight and
warrants based on reasonable suspicion of wrong-doing. However, we now know that
governments and corporations are bypassing oversight and abusing the capacity to
surveil their own citizens – and those of foreign countries – just because they technically
can.
The technology can be configured differently.
Technical experts will be needed to ensure that any new principles agreed upon by
governments actually prohibit and police indiscriminate data collection, backdoors into
software or hardware, the hacking of submarine cables, the sabotage of networks etc.
And new standard operating procedures with regular reporting on arrangements between
governments and corporations that protect private data will need to be implemented.