ABRANET - Contribution - Principles and Multistakeholder
Governance for Internet - Worldwide digital age values.
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Eduardo Neger
Region: Brazil
Organization: Abranet - Associacao Brasileira de Internet
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Principles and Multistakeholder Governance for Internet
Abstract
ABRANET - Brazilian Internet Association - Principles and Multistakeholder Governance
for Internet. Worldwide digital age values. 1. Freedom, privacy, human rights, 2.
Democratic and collaborative governance, 3. Universality, 4. Diversity, 5. Innovation, 6.
Net Neutrality, 7. Unaccountability of the Network, 8.Functionality, Security and Stability,
9.Standardization and Interoperability, 10. Legal and Regulatory Environment.
Document
ABRANET - Contribution - Principles and Multistakeholder Governance for Internet
ABRANET - Brazilian Internet Association - Principles and Multistakeholder Governance
for Internet. Worldwide digital age values. 1. Freedom, privacy and human rights, 2.
Democratic and collaborative governance, 3. Universality, 4. Diversity, 5. Innovation, 6.
Neutrality of the Network, 7. Unaccountability of the Network, 8.Functionality, Security and
Stability, 9.Standardization and Interoperability, 10. Legal and Regulatory Environment.
1. Internet Principles
Abranet proposes the adoption of the principles listed below, which summarize the values
??selected by CGI.br, multistakeholder governance body of the Internet in Brazil, for the
continued development of civil liberties and the network, and that can contribute on a
global level, not only to its continuing expansion, but also and especially for the realization
of human rights in the digital age.
The defended adoption of such principles will still be a great achievement for the user’s
protection from any nationality against violations and abuses of law, an issue that has
faced considerable difficulty in standardization around the world because of political
interferences.
The principles, for establishing core values, establish a state to be sought, and will
provide guidance to the rules issued by countries as well as the rules established by each
user in their own environment. Selected such values??, it will be possible, in the end,
spread their protection effectively at a national level, adopting them as stony values ??the
user and the network, turning them into universal legal right to be safeguarded at all
different scales of network:
1. Freedom, privacy and human rights The use of the Internet must be driven by the
principles of freedom of expression, individual privacy and the respect for human rights,
recognizing them as essential to the preservation of a fair and democratic society.
2. Democratic and collaborative governance Internet governance must be exercised in
a transparent, multilateral and democratic manner, with the participation of the various
sectors of society, thereby preserving and encouraging its character as a collective
creation. 3. Universality Internet access must be universal so that it becomes a tool for
human and social development, thereby contributing to the formation of an inclusive and
nondiscriminatory society, for the benefit of all. 4. Diversity Cultural diversity must be
respected and preserved and its expression must be stimulated, without the imposition of
beliefs, customs or values. 5. Innovation Internet governance must promote the
continuous development and widespread dissemination of new technologies and models
for access and use. 6. Neutrality of the network Filtering or traffic privileges must meet
ethical and technical criteria only, excluding any political, commercial, religious and
cultural factors or any other form of discrimination or preferential treatment.
7. Unaccountability of the network All action taken against illicit activity on the network
must be aimed at those directly responsible for such activities, and not at the means of
access and transport, always upholding the fundamental principles of freedom, privacy
and the respect for human rights. 8. Functionality, security and stability The stability,
security and overall functionality of the network must be actively preserved through the
adoption of technical measures that are consistent with international standards and
encourage the adoption of best practices. 9. Standardization and interoperability
The Internet must be based on open standards that facilitate interoperability and enable
all to participate in its development. 10. Legal and regulatory environments
The legal and regulatory environments must preserve the dynamics of the Internet as a
space for collaboration.
[1]
[1] Resolution CGI.br/Res/2009/03/P, with the Principles for the Governance and Use of
the Internet.
2. Internet Governance Model
Abranet argues that Internet Governance follows "multistakeholder" model adopted by
CGI.BR – Comitê Gestor da Internet no Brasil. Abranet understands that in order to
achieve the desired effects with such a model, it is elementary that the government
involvement in the governance framework is minority, increasing the participation of
society organizations (academia, technical, private sector and civil society) in the taken
decisions:
“Multistakeholder processes could and should enhance democracy by increasing
opportunities for effective participation by those most directly impacted by decisions and
particularly those at the grassroots who so often are voiceless in these processes. It
should enhance democracy by ensuring that decisions made are reflective of and
responsive to local concerns and to the broadest range of those who must bear the
consequences. It should enhance democracy by making democratic processes more
flexible and responsive, able to adjust to changing contexts circumstances, technologies,
impacted populations.” [1]
[1] Gurumurthy, Anita. IT for Change, WSIS plus 10 review by UNESCO, 27th February,
2013 in http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multistakeholder_governance_model