Cities, Citizens, and Internet Governance
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Thomas Lowenhaupt
Region: New York, USA
Organization: Connecting.nyc Inc.
Sector: Other
Keywords: cities, at-large, citizens, cities, city
Abstract
Most of us live in cities that are only now beginning to take advantage of that critical
Internet infrastructure, the Top Level Domain. While our lives are increasingly affected by
digital developments enabled by the Internet, city residents have scant access to the
governance structures that establish the policies, standards, and practices that guide the
Net?s operation. This submission suggests ways cities and their residents can better
participate in Internet governance at the local and global levels.
Document
Background
When ICANN earnestly activated its new TLD issuance responsibilities in 2005, its initial
inclination was to view cities as outside the scope of entities eligible for Top Level
Domains. After a persuasive campaign by representatives from Berlin, Barcelona, New
York, Paris, Tokyo and other global cities, that viewpoint changed and cities were
included within ICANN’s 2008 resolution authorizing a new TLD program.
As the ICANN community struggled through the long process of developing an Applicant
Guidebook, many in the city-TLD community noted that the needs of cities and their
probable use of TLDs differed in significant ways from those of generic and business
TLDs. And they urged that a different set of requisites for city-TLDs be established.
Additionally, these proponents urged that cities be forewarned about the implications of a
TLD, enabling cities to better prepare for the responsibilities entailed in their planning and
operation.
However, the challenges surrounding the completion of an Applicant Guidebook and
pressure from eager applicants did not allow for applicant categories. And the only
significant interventions were those proffered by ICANN’s Government Advisory
Committee (GAC) on behalf of the integrity of geographic names.
As of March 2014 it seems likely that approximately 35 cities will receive TLDs in the
coming year.
This submission advances two topics for consideration by NETmundial. The first involves
changes to the city-TLD issuance and development process and for the inclusion of cities
in Internet governance processes. The second suggests a means for cities and individual
Internet users to better participate in Internet governance processes.
Cities and Top Level Domains
Cities are amongst the oldest and most complex entities we encounter in our daily lives.
They house more than half our planet’s population, with U.N. estimates projecting that will
rise to 75% by mid-century. Cities are the places from which a preponderance of ideas
and economic development emerge. And there’s growing acceptance that a sustainable
planet is likely to arise from the efficiencies of urban areas.
To date, the digital needs of cities have been given short shrift by Internet technologists
and the Net’s governance ecology. As remedy, we offer the following suggestions.
The Roadmap should recommend a more robust process for issuing cityTLDs.
This should include a recommendation that the TLD issuing entity
provide an informative and enlightening application process for cities
considering TLD acquisition. While the “letter of non-objection’” required of
the 2012 city-TLD applicants held the spirit of informed consent, the
inclusion of a detailed scoping of a city-TLDs utility to residents, local
businesses, quality of life, government operation, and global identity would
better contribute to their efficacious planning and development.
Cities do not have a formal place in the Internet governance ecology.
While a City-TLD Governance and Best Practices workshop was held at
the 2010 IGF in Vilnius, follow-up has been scant. At ICANN, there’s a
move to include city-TLDs within the Registry Constituency of the GNSO,
but only as part of a broader geographic representation. However,
considering their size, their unique needs, and their importance to the
global economy and a sustainable planet, we urge that cities be
considered a full stakeholder within any multistakeholder regime.
A Message From The Bottom
Our lives are increasingly affected by digital activities enabled by the Internet. Yet Internet
users have modest access to the “bottom-up” governance structures that establish the
policies, standards, and practices that guide the Net’s operation.
Here in New York City we’ve experienced a small inkling of the potential of bottom-up
participation in Internet oversight and management through two At-Large Structures. One
is operated by the New York Internet Society, a chapter of the global Internet Society, and
another by Connecting.nyc Inc., an advocacy and education organization focused on the
development of the .nyc TLD. For those not familiar with the role of the At-Large
Structures within ICANN, here’s a brief history.
In its early days ICANN provided for strong representation of individual Internet users in
its decision making processes. It did so by allocating 5 seats on its board of directors to
be filled by Internet users, with each of ICANN’s regions selecting one member via a
direct election. One such election was held and, for a time, 5 ICANN board members were
selected by individual Internet users.
The corporation found fault with the selection process and replaced the user-selected
members with an appointed At-Large Advisory Committee and a Nominating Committee
charged with selecting several board members.
In recent years the At-Large was reconstituted and now participates in selecting one (1)
voting member to ICANN’s board of directors. This member is selected via a multi-staged
process that provides for each At-Large Structure (organizations with membership and
other structures) casting a vote for its preferred board member.
While one board member is better than none, by any measure, under today’s governance
formation, the world’s 2+ billion individual Internet users and the At-Large Structure’s
impact on ICANN’s governance decisions remains tenuous.
In our role as an At-Large Structure Connecting.nyc Inc. has observed a significant
improvement of the At-Large’s operation over the past several years. As one example,
this past year the At-Large made significant contributions more than a dozen ICANN
policy considerations.
But far more can be achieved by expanding and enhancing user engagement the through
the following actions.
The number of seats selected by individual Internet users on ICANN’s
board of directors should be increased. Reverting to the original 5 seats
seems a reasonable short term target.
The new board seats should be allocated as of old, one per ICANN region.
The new seats should be selected by direct vote of each region’s At-Large
Structures. (There are currently 180 At-Large Structures in the 5 regions.)
The number of At-Large Structures should to be increased with additional
resources provided to facilitate their operation.
Care should be taken to assure that participation by the poor and the
marginalized is facilitated.
Concomitant with this resource allocation there needs to be improved
transparency and accountability measures for the At-Large.
In those instances where At-Large Structures exist in cities with TLDs, city
government should be provided with ex officio participation.
For those interested in learning more about the At-Large, an At-Large Summit is to be
held during ICANN’s June 2014 London meeting, with a representative from each of the
At-Large Structures in attendance.
If is our belief that engaging cities as stakeholders and expanding the At-Large will
democratize and enhance the ICANN’s operation.
-----
Connecting.nyc Inc. is a New York State not-for-profit formed in 2006 to advocate and
facilitate the development of the .nyc TLD as a public interest resource. In 2012 it was
recognized as an At-Large Structure by ICANN.