Submission on Roadmap for IG evolution by the Articulation
of Brazilian Civil Society Organizations
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Joana Varon Ferraz
Region: Brazil
Organization: Articulao de Organizaes da Sociedade Civil Brasileira
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: Human rights, Multistakeholder Decision Making, Coordination
Mechanism, Transparence, Accountability and Enforcement
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
The undersigned Brazilian civil society organizations propose the following concepts to be
taken into account while developing a roadmap for the further evolution of the internet
governance ecosystem: 1) Human Rights principles should be the core of IG and should
be enforced globally 2) For enabling such protections, the development of IG institutional
frameworks should also be guided by a set of procedural principles to be observed by
governments and private organizations that play a role on the governance of all layers of
the Internet 3) The current IG institutions should be reformed to address a set of both
human rights and democratic procedural principles, but in order to maintain a transparent,
democratic, multistakeholder, decentralized and coordinated IG ecosystem, we also
highlight the need for: a) implementing a multistakeholder coordination mechanism to
work as a "router", providing communication and coordination among IG institutions, and
b) reforming and empowering the IGF.
Document
The undersigned Brazilian civil society organizations, committed to the development of
the Internet and its use for advancing social and economic justice, propose that following
concepts should be taken into account while developing a roadmap for the further
evolution of the internet governance ecosystem:
General statement
Any evolution of the internet governance ecosystem should aim to foster institutional
arrangements that respect:
1) Human rights principles. Human Rights principles should be the core of the Internet
Governance ecosystem and should be enforced globally. The discussion of emerging
problems, such as mass surveillance, and of the institutional mechanisms to cope with
them should be guided by these principles (these were listed in our contribution for
Section 1 of NetMundial). Nevertheless, there is need to develop institutional frameworks
that help to ensure that human rights principles are observed.
2) Besides human rights principles, the development of these institutional frameworks
should also be guided a set of procedural principles which contribute to building
legitimate, participatory and effective governance arrangements. It is important that these
principles are observed by governments and private organizations that play a role on the
governance of all layers of the Internet.
transparence;
wide, open and diverse participation of all the stakeholders in decision
making processes;
effectiveness;
accountability and
enforcement.
Regarding the evolution of the current IG institutions
Internet Governance should be transparent, democratic, multilateral and
multistakeholder, with the full envolvement of governments, civil society, the technical
and academic communities and the business sector. It should serve as a catalyst for
development and for the promotion of human rights.
Internet Governance institutional frameworks should be decentralized, aim to
involve all stakeholders on decision-making, be adaptable and ensure that stakeholders
with adequate expertise are called to address a particular set of problems. The outcomes
of discussions should be effective and enforceable and be aligned with Human Rights
principles. To strike such balance there is need for:
An effective framework for Internet policy-making
A transparent and accountable multistakeholder decision making process
that promotes the participation of actors from developed and developing
countries across all stakeholder groups.
Decisions made should be efficient and enforceable. Depending on the
nature and stage of the discussions, sometimes decisions should be
embodied in multilateral agreements.
In cases in which hard international law is not the best solution, soft law
approaches, best practices, self-regulation and technical solutions might
be considered, as they can sometimes be more efficient.
The respect for fundamental human rights should be ensured.
There is need for a mechanism to provide communication and coordination among
IG institutions. This mechanism should ensure that distribute governance does not lead
to disjoint and fragmanted policy-making.
A multistakeholder council* should assume such function, working as
both an executive committee and a router to distribute tasks/emerging
issues to be dealt by either the existing institutions or by an ad hoc
mechanisms;
Participants of the council should mirror the diversity of views in their own
stakeholder group. Participation of actors from developed and developing
countries should be ensured across all stakeholder groups.
This mechanism should receive inputs from the IGF;
This council could be hosted under the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development (CSTD).The United NationsEconomic and
Social Council (ECOSOC) became politically responsible to oversee the
UN system-wide follow-up of WSIS and it does that through CSTD.
According to Resolution 2006/46, CSTD should review and assess
progress made in the implementation of WSIS outcomes and make
advices. To do so, CSTD seeks inputs from international organizations,
the private sector, civil society and other entities, therefore it has a
established record of communicating with governmental and nongovernmental
organizations;
A multistakeholder council created under CSTD should have the mandate
to a) consult with other UN organizations or other institutions outside the
UN system, such as technical institutions (ICANN, IETF, etc); b) in it's
router function, make recommendations on issues to address and possible
approaches to organizations within the UN system or to non-governmental
organizations; c) take decisions which could take the form of soft law,
identifying good practices, guidelines for self-regulation, etc; d) Send the
outcomes of its discussions for appreciation in CSTD, if appropriate.
These outcomes could be taken to ECOSOC and to the UNGA.
The Internet Governance Forum should be reformed and empowered and the
quality of its outcomes should be improved. The IGF could work as a clearing house
that feeds inputs into other existing internet governance spaces, and, eventually, to any
mechanism to be created. Some proposals for IGF improvement were already indentified
on the Report of the Working Group on Improvements to the Internet Governance
Forum, created under the auspices of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development (http://bit.ly/1dZvoDn).
Some of this points were:
The IGF should develop more tangible outputs, based on public policy
related questions.
The IGF should have a more propositive role for agenda setting in the
international arena, being able to indicate politicy options identified by the
multistakeholder community regarding a particular issue
Stakeholders should foster transparency in their selection process to the
MAG. The selection process should provide more diversity, especially
regarding groups which have been underrepresented in the MAG.
The secretariat should be strengthened
Predictable, stable and neutral funding should be guaranteed
The IGF should function in close cooperation with regional IGFs
Proposed by:
Article 19
Centro de Tecnologia e Sociedade - CTS/FGV
Coletivo Digital
Instituto Brasileiro de Defesa do Consumidor - IDEC
Instituto Intervozes
Instituto de Tecnologia e Sociedade - ITS
Knowledge Commons*
Movimento Mega
Partido Pirata do Brasil
GPOPAI
PROTESTE
ps. * Knowledge Commons presented a reservation regarding this paragraph.