Contribution from LAC-IX
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Max Larson Henry; Alejandro Escobar; Hernan Arcidiacono;
Rolando Toledo; Fabian Mejia
Region: Latin America and The Caribbean
Organization: LAC-IX (The IXP Association for Latin America and The
Caribbean)
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: IXP, Internet Exchange Point, Traffic, Interconnections
Abstract
The Internet Exchange Points (IXP) are considered critical infrastructure for the Internet
and are a fundamental component for its Sustainability, Resilience and growth. Some
IXPs in the LAC region have already developed Internet Principles which are public.
Among them, there are principles affecting traffic exchange which are included in this
document.
Document
Internet Exchange Points
An Internet Exchange Points (IXP) are considered critical infrastructure for the Internet
and are a fundamental component for its Sustainability, Resilience and growth. IXPs are
neutral network facilities that enables the interconnection of more than two independent
Internet networks, for the purpose of facilitating interconnections.
An IXP does not require the Internet traffic passing between any pair of participating
Autonomous Systems to pass through any third Autonomous System, nor does it alter or
otherwise interfere with such traffic. The rules and conditions for traffic exchange are
agreed by its members.
The LAC-IX Association
The association of Internet Exchange Points for Latin America and Caribbean (LAC-IX)
was formally constituted in 2012 to increase the collaboration between traffic exchange
points in the LAC region. It's been growing and supporting the establishment of additional
IXPs since then.
Contribution to Internet Principles:
Some IXPs in the LAC region have already developed Internet Principles which are
public. Among them, there are principles affecting traffic exchange.
* The interconnection between various Internet actors, with non-discriminatory conditions
that enable guaranteed access to the network and it’s contents in all the national territory,
must be promoted.
* The stability of the network, it’s security and global functionality must be actively
preserved by means of adopting technical measures that are compatible with international
standards, and encouraging the adoption of best practices. No one should have the ability
to “turn off” the Internet totally or partially, in a territory and/or a specific segment of the
population, and the service providers must be able to provide their services freely.
* The architecture of the Internet and the communications systems, must be based on
open standards that enable interoperability.
* The juridical and regulatory environments must preserve the dynamics of the Internet, as
an open collaborative space for all users, and must be guaranteed to remain free of
blocks, interruptions, censures, interferences and surveillance.
* Internet governance must promote the continuous development and widespread
dissemination of new technologies and models for access and use.
* All action taken against illicit activity on the network must be aimed at those directly
responsible for such activities, and not at the means of access and transport.