Council of Europe
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Lee Hibbard
Region: Directorate General Human Rights and Rule of Law
Organization: Coordinator for Internet Governance
Sector: Other
Keywords:
Abstract
The Council of Europe is the continent?s leading human rights organisation. It includes 47
member states, 28 of which are members of the European Union. All Council of Europe
member states have signed up to the European Convention on Human Rights, a treaty
designed to protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law.The European Court of
Human Rights oversees the implementation of the Convention in the member states.
Individuals can bring complaints of human rights violations to the Strasbourg Court once
all possibilities of appeal have been exhausted in the member state concerned. The
European Union is preparing to sign the European Convention on Human Rights, creating
a common European legal space for over 820 million citizens.
Document
The Council of Europe's 10 Internet Governance Principles were prepared and adopted
by its 47 member states in 2010-2011. These principles are based on Europe's core
values of human rights, rule of law and democracy. They provide the social, economic
and human context for the Organisation's standard-setting, monitoring and cooperation
activities in the field of Internet governance. Above all, they are baseline for the 47
member states national, European and international public policy regarding the Internet.
Several of the CoE principles can be found in the principles of several other organisations
and bodies (such as the APC, IGF Dynamic Coalition on Internet rights and principles,
GNI, OECD and ISOC), including multi-stakeholder governance, global nature of the
Internet, its open architecture and network neutrality. Certain of them have been
developed further by the CoE, in particular member states commitment to "doing no harm"
to the Internet's universality, integrity and openness of the Internet (see
https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1835707) and on network neutrality (see
https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1678287).
Everyone has the right to freedom of expression and access to information regardless of
frontiers (Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights), and it is on this basis
that the CoE is responding to many of the challenges about how the Internet is governed
and by whom:
- governance "of" the Internet i.e. its architecture and the cooperation between state and
non-state actors to protect and preserve the (one) Internet as we know it.
- governance "on" the Internet i.e. the legtimacy of state and non-state actors to shaping
and deciding on public policy affecting the content and application layers of the Internet
(e.g. CoE's human rights guidelines on social networks and on search engines).
The CoE's work reconciles the roles, responsibilities, sovereignty and legitimacy of
various Internet actors with regard to their commitment and action to protecting
everyone's human rights. It addresses the positive and negative commitments of actors to
protect the Internet while, at the same time, while erring on the side of freedom and liberty
that is the Internet's very nature. Progress can also been seen in certain judgments of the
European Court of Human Rights including on freedom of expression, mass online
surveillance, and on the right to privacy (see:
http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/FS_New_technologies_ENG.pdf).
A mapping of the CoE's work on Internet governance can be found in its 2012-2015
strategy (see https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1919461) but more consolidation and
address of certain issues, such as transparency and accountability as well as more
positive obligations to help people access and participate in society, is needed in order to
address these issues and arguable deficits. There is convergence between what the
CoE's core values and Brazil's Marco Civil da Internet and it would be timely and
appropriate to share, to exchange and even lead on aspects of NETmundial where
necessary.