Principles of Internet Governance and its ongoing
development and evolution over the coming years
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Edmundo A. Matarazzo
Region: Brazil
Organization: ITIBR - Instituto de Tecnologia Brasil
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: Internet, principles, development, evolution, neutrality,
innovation, freedom of choice, collaboration
Abstract
The so-called "Principles for Governance, development and evolution of the Internet" form
the foundation of today's Internet and its future. And, its dissemination and acceptance
among users, and the various segments of society represented in national and
international forums, is an essential way to increase the participation of all the mentioned
Governance, development and evolution of the Internet. The intent of the principles is not
to set goals, but to identify the key values and conditions that the Internet will continue to
be a tool to improve the daily lives of all people.
Document
Introduction
Noting the reference points established to guide the activities at the event called
International Multilateral Meeting on Internet Governance, to be held in Sao Paulo, Brazil,
on 23 and 24 April 2014, and bearing in mind that only through collaboration among all
participants will be possible to build understandings that can be widely accepted, we offer
related to the topic Principles for Governance and Internet the present contribution.
As certainly mentioned in other contributions, there are a number of documents from
various institutions, aimed to identify and explain the principles that lead to continuous
innovation and expansion of the Internet. What highlights the importance, usefulness and
adequacy of the Internet to people's needs. Indeed, the acceptance of several of these
principles occurs regardless of laws or other instruments and the practical results remain
the permanent innovation and expansion of the Internet in all parts, with the most varied
models and solutions.
In view of this , a fundamental element to be preserved by any principles is that the
Internet is an open “think tank” to all people interested, and free to introduce innovations
and to receive or not the acceptance of users who freely exercise their power of choice
and opinion.
The international event of São Paulo itself reflects an important element of the Internet,
which is open participation to all parts and the construction of results from a free and
committed participation to the development of Internet, as occurs regularly in numerous
other international, regional and local meetings of these same stockholders.
The meeting provides another opportunity to continue to build on the foundations already
established, and to share documents, positions and views on the Internet, in particular
regarding its governance and its future development.
Internet and Governments
Currently there are several discussions about the need for public policies and legislation
about rules to use the Internet. Because of this, the meeting is an opportunity to
demonstrate that it is not possible or advisable to restrict creativity, freedom of choice and
expression, which cannot be subject to restriction, repression or control, among other
interests of the people
The information available globally produces unimaginable events of sharing without the
use of the Internet, such as: a musical success attended and enjoyed by people from
different parts of the world thanks to the global network, as well as the views of the
conflicts that unfortunately following part of the daily life of the world community, or even
shared personal interests
Share information, opinions and broaden your social network, among others, are
conditions that people with access to the Internet already incorporated as part of their
daily lives, and these conditions must be ensured by all involved in the process of Internet
Governance
In this sense, it is worth noting that the so-called cyberspace or the Internet is not an
alternative reality from that we live in, but a tool that each of us uses in their day to day to
make life better.
Social networks, which have always existed, it was only magnified by the Internet, making
what was already part of the everyday and the result of the free will of each.
When using the Internet all valid principles that govern our lives in society still applied, as
well as human rights, freedom of expression and all other consecrated by various national
and international institutions.
Therefore, the Internet reflects the use made of it by the people, for this reason should
continue to be an open, free and comprehensive tool.
Internet and telecommunications services
Unlike telecommunications services, subject to national and international regulation, the
Internet is a global platform that uses telecommunications services to connect users and
computer networks, and is characterized as a Value Added Service in various national
and international laws and is included in the deals of the world trade treaty of the World
Trade Organization (OMC).
Note that the Internet was developed to make possible the use of any telecommunication
service and is this model that ensures a free and open use of the Internet by anyone, a
fact that distinguishes the Internet design of the design of telecommunications services.
At the beginning, the Internet technique and technologies was seen as "unfit for
professional applications" by the telecommunications industry , however, over time this
technique began to be used by the telecommunications industry and is now considered
the only solution to the so called "technology convergence".
A great change of opinion of experts in telecommunications in a relatively short time ,
especially if we consider that the attempts like the Integrated Services Digital Network
(ISDN) object of studies and recommendations of the International Telecommunication
Union ( ITU ) which was designed to be the way for the future for telecommunications.
The flexibility and low cost of Internet technique and technologies enabled numerous
technical changes in the telecommunications industry, until the Internet itself becomes the
object of desire of large corporations in the industry who spare no efforts in trying to
transform the Internet in the converging telecommunications service as a natural path for
the future of telecommunications.
The discussions involving the Internet sector and the telecommunications sector has
spread worldwide to the point that in many countries the regulation began to consider the
use of effective measures (legal) to ensure the free and open use of the Internet and no
interference of telecommunications operators in the uses and the choices of users by
conditions established by the telecommunications services used.
The possibility that commercial interests can be the excuse to impose limitations or
restrictions on the freedom of access and choice of Internet users and eventually affect
the proper functioning of the Internet can be a reality in a very short time. This theme just
gaining notoriety and is subject of discussion in many countries and international forums
under the title " Network Neutrality ".
However, little is discussed about the future of the telecommunications industry and this
discussion is essential to the future of the Internet , as without telecommunications
services widely disseminated not only access the Internet but the actual evolution of
interconnection of computer networks that form the Internet will be limited.
The universalization polices of telecommunications services already includes the aspects
required for such services also serve to access the Internet? If restrictions are present to
Internet use, what development of telecommunications services will be necessary?
This element requires studies and considerations so the policies of universal
telecommunications services will include the appropriate scenarios, taking into account
the support for Internet use.
In this respect, it is noteworthy that universal services will continue to be needed, plus a
new feature to ensure that any person using the universal telecommunications service
can even use it for Internet use.
Internet Governance
Many would like to take the Internet Governance due to its growing importance to society.
In some situations proposals to do a "recreation" of the Internet as if a huge mass of users
were demanding such changes.
The current model of Internet Governance, created from actions of a few countries and a
lot of volunteer work in various sectors of society, is undoubtedly responsible for the
success of today's Internet . This model " multi stakeholder " enables greater participation
so that more countries can join the existing governance effort , making the governance
entities in forums of global representation .
For this process to take place the various Governments need to ensure alignment of
public policies related to telecommunications infrastructure and the Internet to ensure that
will be no barriers to the development and evolution of Internet governance under the
mentioned model.
National and international legal and economic structures should enable the use of the
Internet in activities such as electronic commerce, tele-education, telemedicine, among
others, for innovations that can improve people's lives may arise.
Civil Society Participation in Internet Governance is essential to add the view of those who
use the Internet and accordingly reflect acceptance, discontent, wishes and especially the
credibility and reliability in the use of the Internet that represent the power of choice of the
people.
The private sector participation in Internet Governance is essential to offer the vision of
entrepreneurs and "think tanks” creations responsible for all the innovative use of the
Internet and the use of resources and infrastructure as required.
The academic sector participation in Internet Governance is essential to offer the vision of
researchers and scientists forming stimulating innovation and knowledge bases that are
essential to everyday society.
Therefore , these and other segments of society must be present in the institutions
engaged in the Internet Governance , and must be involved performing work together to
ensure the principles of freedom of expression, freedom of choice, freedom of access to
information and ideas, democratic participation, innovation and encouraging the
development , distribution and accessibility of the Internet for everyone.
The principles set out below, did not want to be an exhaustive list and should be treated
according to the dynamics of evolution of the Society in order to preserve the Internet and
its evolution as a tool to serve the interests of the people and accepted by most
stakeholders involved in the construction and expansion of the Internet.
The principles are not original, but based on the Principles for Governance and Use of
Internet developed by the Internet Steering Committee in Brazil (CGI BR).
1. Freedom, privacy and human rights
The use of the Internet must be driven by the principles of freedom of expression,
individual privacy and the respect for human rights, recognizing them as essential to the
preservation of a fair and democratic society.
A global, open and free nature of the Internet must be assured as a common good in
the global scope. The use of free and open way should be preserved as the essence
of the Internet platform repudiating justifications commercial, technical, legal or political
that can be presented to disregard this principle. The rule of law must be the basis for any
legislation on Internet use States should ensure full compliance with its obligations
under international law.
2. Democratic and collaborative governance
Internet governance must be exercised in a transparent, multilateral and democratic
manner, with the participation of the various sectors of society, thereby preserving and
encouraging its character as a collective creation.
The Internet Governance should be exercised jointly by various segments of society that
should work together collaboratively, through transparent and open processes to public
opinion with broad debate and that reflect the needs, ideas and desires of users Internet
and to refrain from any measurement of violating human rights, equal and democratic
participation, respect for the rule of law or jeopardize the global and open nature of the
Internet.
3. Universality
Internet access must be universal so that it becomes a tool for human and social
development, thereby contributing to the formation of an inclusive and nondiscriminatory
society, for the benefit of all.
Access to the Internet should be possible from any telecommunications service
without discrimination, both as users involved, such as the use of the Internet. Public
policies aimed at universalization of telecommunications services should include provision
that such services need to be able to support the use of the Internet in appropriate
conditions.
4. Diversity
Cultural diversity must be respected and preserved and its expression must be stimulated,
without the imposition of beliefs, customs or values.
Public policies should ensure the right to access information and opinions when using the
Internet expanding the possibilities of knowledge and dissemination of cultural diversity
through the World Wide Web.
The same rights that people have disconnected from the Internet should also be protected
online.
The effectiveness of privacy protection can only be achieved with the collaboration in
global scope.
5. Innovation
Internet governance must promote the continuous development and widespread
dissemination of new technologies and models for access and use.
Public policies should encourage innovation and dissemination of new technologies to
access and use the Internet and limit to the minimum possible tributary, commercial and
industrial requirements.
6. Neutrality of the network
Filtering or traffic privileges must meet ethical and technical criteria only, excluding any
political, commercial, religious and cultural factors or any other form of discrimination or
preferential treatment.
The use of the Internet must be done freely and according to the choice of each user and
are valid all the principles that govern our lives in society, as well as human rights,
freedom of expression and all other rights enshrined in various national and international
institutions.
7. Unaccountability of the network
All action taken against illicit activity on the network must be aimed at those directly
responsible for such activities, and not at the means of access and transport, always
upholding the fundamental principles of freedom, privacy and the respect for human rights.
Companies that develop the tools used on the Internet cannot be held responsible for the
use that people make of these tools or by content created or inserted by a third party.
8. Functionality, security and stability
The stability, security and overall functionality of the network must be actively preserved
through the adoption of technical measures that are consistent with international
standards and encourage the adoption of best practices.
Public policies should encourage the use of infrastructures that support the functioning
, security and stability of the Internet, particularly in the use of telecommunications
resources across countries
9. Standardization and interoperability
The Internet must be based on open standards that facilitate interoperability and enable
all to participate in its development.
States should encourage the use of open standards that facilitate the operation of the
Internet and to ensure that regulation of the telecommunications industry do not establish
restrictions or other constraints that compromise the interoperability of the Internet.
Moreover, public policies should consider the use of limited resources (radio spectrum) to
access and use the Internet, especially in cases of solutions to support private or public
computers networks.
10. Legal and regulatory environments
The legal and regulatory environments must preserve the dynamics of the Internet as a
space for collaboration
States should ensure that the legal and regulatory environment does not offer different
constraints or barriers of the cases dealt with in the context of the process of Internet
Governance.