Two principles, from history - and forward
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: David Allen
Region: United States
Organization: Collab CPR
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: democracy, free expression, history, principles
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
History, recent and past, teaches two principles for Internet governance. Then the
opposed camps who have so far stalemated movement can, individually, build from these
principles to devolve a framework and roadmap forward.
Document
Principles
Sound principles grow from human experience and history. Let us suggest that history
promulgates two seminal principles, for Internet governance. From these two starting
points, then further guidance may become clear.
The proximate history spans the recent couple decades, beginning as the world stirred, to
account the growing Internet phenomenon. Much longer human history has given us hardwon
wisdom, for governance that suits our natures.
* The recent decades have been punctuated by, first the US Clinton administration’s
incorporating a names-and-numbers actor, then a decade ago the two WSIS summits,
and recently WCIT. Stretching back prior to any formal steps, two implacably opposed
camps have, over these couple of decades and to this day, frozen a stalemate.
* Meanwhile, much longer history teaches some governance fundamentals.
From this summation, two principles arise:
One, the first principle: Governance must be democratic. The Englishman Churchill said it
succinctly, "Democracy is the worst form of government – except all the others that have
been tried." (Namely, all the others as result of which man has died, over eons, to escape.)
That requires, specifically, governance by democratic states, duly elected and – most
especially – faithfully responsive to their citizens. With the Internet global, that means
governance by regional and global democratic mechanisms. Thus in the case of the
Internet, democratic governments, together and in concert, regionally and globally, are to
exercise policy discretion and then execute policy for the Internet.
Pointedly, this precludes “all stakeholders on a common footing.” Arising from the
compromises that drove WSIS, some provisions in the Tunis Agenda proved to need
tidying up, going forward.
All stakeholders, over long history, have played their manifold roles in a society. The
present coining of the notion, multistakeholderism, helps highlight the importance of
society-wide contributions to a process of policy formation. Following on that process,
democratic states then decide policy, and implement.
Two, the second principle: Free expression must be inviolate.
History has taught:
* Free flow of information is the fundamental enabler for innovation. In particular, freely
flowing innovation gave birth to the Internet and could continue to propel its cornucopia for
a better life. Around the world, for all, if not stymied.
* Free flow is necessary for the medium to connect all mankind, around the world, for the
possibilities that a world connection may catalyze. With perhaps the prospect for
consensus where it matters.
* Not least, free expression is linchpin for the fluid community dialogue that necessarily
underpins democracy.
Roadmap
While this piece begins as a dialogue about principles, for NETmundial, the two principles
also set the stage for a framework, for evolution. To begin a roadmap toward governance
mechanisms that embody the principles.
As the two principles derive from history, they also offer guidance for the two camps who
presently stalemate evolution.
* For the camp that has so far enshrined multistakeholderism: Only democratic states
govern suitably, including for Internet governance. History insists.
* For the camp that has degraded free expression: History rejects the practice.
Note that acknowledgement – individually, within each camp – of each camp’s separate
mandate, as derived above from the two principles, can free up progress toward a
framework. If each camp acts on its separate mandate, as above, each may
accommodate, and perhaps find the possibility to join with, the other camp.
Ultimately, the principles devolve to global mechanisms for Internet governance that serve
both camps and, more to the point, that will serve all.