Evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem and the
future of the Internet
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Matthew Shears
Region: USA
Organization: Center for Democracy & Technology
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: Roadmap, Internet, multistakeholder, IGF, ICANN, surveillance
Doc Attached: Click here to see the doc 1
Abstract
CDT welcomes the NETmundial meeting on Internet governance and looks forward to
exploring practical and credible proposals for evolving the Internet govenance ecosystem
in ways that further the Internet's global reach, openness, distributed governance and
unique capacity to empower the exercise of human rights.
Document
The Center for Democracy & Technology (CDT) is pleased to submit the following
comments to the NETmundial Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet
Governance. This submission responds to issue # 2 on the Roadmap for the Further
Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem.
CDT welcomes the decision by the Brazilian government to host the upcoming
NETmundial meeting. The meeting should be a useful opportunity to review some of the
persistent and sometimes problematic issues central to the future of the Internet
governance and related public policy discussions. The meeting seeks to encourage and
explore ways in which the Internet governance ecosystem might change, which, if done
so for the right reasons, could bring about appropriate and constructive evolution.
As we all engage in this process CDT urges a measured and reflective approach.The
Internet has become an enabler of the success of nations, has empowered persons
around the globe in ways unimagined and continues to encourage and facilitate endless
innovation and creativity. It is, as the NETmundial website suggests, a “global platform for
social, economic and human development and a catalyzer to exercise human rights.”
Therefore, changes to the Internet and its governance must sustain and enhance the
benefits of this medium.
The successful evolution of the Internet as a global network has depended on a flexible,
decentralized, bottom-up and issue-driven set of interrelated governance processes that
are open to participation by all stakeholders. CDT believes that change should not occur
solely for sake of change, or as a response to pressures of a particular stakeholder group
(or some subset thereof). Changes should not be driven by agendas that seek to diminish
the evolving roles and responsibilities of non-governmental stakeholders. CDT believes
that proposals to unduly increase the role of governments in Internet governance will only
exacerbate governance challenges rather than lessen them.
A case in point is the past year’s on-going revelations about the scope of surveillance
activity by the US, the UK, and other governments. CDT opposes and seeks substantive
changes to the mass surveillance regimes of states but does not believe that issues of
Internet governance and surveillance should be conflated. While some try to point to
mass surveillance as an example of the supposed failure of the current Internet
governance ecosystem, the revelations have, in fact, exposed exactly the opposite: the
processes that led to the development of these surveillance practices demonstrate the
danger of governments retreating from open and participatory policy development
processes.
The NETmundial website suggests that responses to furthering the evolution of the
Internet governance ecosystem should seek to “ensure the stability, resilience and
efficiency and also comply with principles of equitable multi-stakeholder participation,
accountability, transparency and predictability.” CDT completely agrees, and suggests
that any proposed change, evolution or addition to the existing Internet governance
ecosystem must be the result of agreed processes that should include, at a minimum:
? multi-stakeholder consultations
? open, inclusive and transparent processes
? identification of real (not perceived) and practical needs that are substantiated
through credible research and analysis
? constructive and proportionate solutions
? multi-stakeholder endorsement, and
? implementation that is accountable, transparent and subject to review.
CDT notes that implementation of any proposed changes to the governance system
should not necessarily require a legislative acts or similar hard law approaches. Nor
should implementation necessitate international treaties or intergovernmental structures.
A diversity of mechanisms exists and we have no doubt that the Internet’s evolution will
bring about further innovation in governance processes and mechanisms.
Any proposed change or solution should also be understood and agreed by all
stakeholders as credibly enhancing the Internet through furthering
? resilience
? interoperability
? reliability
? global reach and scalability
? openness
? decentralization
? accessibility
? end-user control, and
? distributed and inclusive (multi-stakeholder) governance.
These criteria are essential to the future evolution of the Internet and its continued
success and are recognized as such in the following Internet principles and policy
documents, among others:
? The CGI.br Principles for the Governance and the Use of the Internet on Universality
(number 3), Innovation (5), and functionality, security and stability (8)
? The OECD Principles for Internet Policy Making on Promoting the open, distributed
and Interconnected nature of the Internet
? The Council of Europe Declaration on Internet Governance Principles on the
Universality of the Internet, the Integrity of the Internet and Architectural Principles.
Whether we are talking about strengthening the Internet Governance Forum, globalizing
ICANN, bringing other stakeholders into the London Process or improving or establishing
other fora and/or mechanisms, proposals for change must be credible, practical and have
as their intent the continued openness, vibrancy and reach of the Internet.
Finally, the globalization of ICANN and the IANA function will no doubt be the focus of
much attention at the NETmundial meeting. As the globalization of ICANN continues
(through opening offices and increasing its presence internationally) it is essential that
there be fuller discussion of feasible proposals/roadmaps for the future of the IANA
function (and its oversight). Any proposals for change in the core functions or role of
ICANN should be subject to robust evaluative processes and be required to meet key
criteria such as those outlined above; they should not be imposed from above or by one
stakeholder grouping (whether internal or external). Change must preserve and improve
upon ICANN’s open and transparent processes; multi-stakeholder bodies derive their
legitimacy and credibility in part from their transparent processes and ability to reach
consensus. And, it goes without saying that any proposed change to core operational
elements of the management and functioning of the Internet must be assessed with the
greatest of care and considerable caution.
CDT encourages the NETmundial meeting to find constructive, innovative and multistakeholder
ways of furthering the evolution of the Internet governance ecosystem that
are based upon a common understanding among all stakeholders of the imperative of
enhancing the Internet’s resiliency, global reach, openness, distributed governance and
unique capacity to empower the exercise of human rights.