From Forum to NET-Nations
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Mrs. Mary Uduma
Region: Nigeria
Organization: Nigeria Internet Registration Association
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: Sovereignty, Security, Surveillance, big data, Net-Nations,
Multistakeholderism, World Organisation
Abstract
FROM FORUM TO WORLD INTERNET GOVERNANCE ORGANISATION (WIGO)The
issues of big data, security, surveillance and sovereignty have raised concerns among
nations on how and what internet governance should be. For the future of the Internet to
be secured, all actors in their respective roles must have a common properly structured
platform, WORLD INTERNET GOVERNANCE ORGANISATION (WIGO), a global
organization with equal participation of the Government, Private sector, Civil Society,
Technical Community in a multi-stakeholder consensus building NET-NATIONS. focusing
on developing rules and regulations for Cypersecurity and Cybercrime agenda.
Document
FROM FORUM TO WORLD INTERNET GOVERNANCE ORGANISATION
The contention concerning who governs the internet or how it should be governed has
been the major focus of the top ICT organizations. The Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN) is one of these bodies alongside ITU, US Department of
Commerce, Internet Society (ISOC) etc. where technically, the US Government has been
in charge of the Internet, which is no longer acceptable by some countries of the world;
the internet has grown past the control of one country.
The issues of big data, security, surveillance and sovereignty have raised concerns
among nations on how and what internet governance should be.
The Internet now has become the “storehouse”, “access route” for numerous entities
including government, civil society, technical bodies that are keen about the affordability,
accessibility, openness and privacy; and above all, security of the online citizens. This
means that all entities duly categorized by countries have now become citizens of this
NET-NATION.
Therefore, in order for the Internet to escape sole control by a single government, all other
countries must be equally involved in such control. First of all, addressing the issue of
Cybercrime and security of the Internet, is one thing that interests everybody and every
nation. I believe when nations commit to finding lasting solutions for this singular
challenge of cybercrime and cyber security, the other challenges of the Internet
Governance like the technical, legal and regulatory, policy making and the rest can easily
be resolved with equal multistakeholder privilege.
For the future of the Internet to be secured, all actors in their respective roles must have a
common properly structured platform, WORLD INTERNET GOVERNANCE
ORGANISATION (WIGO), a global organization with equal participation of the
Government, Private sector, Civil Society, Technical Community in a multi-stakeholder
consensus building NET-NATIONS.
Governments (globally) have to play a role in the decision-making in governing the
Internet. Government should equally see the “NET” as an avenue with great advantage
since a lot of benefits can be favorable to all if collectively agreed upon. Nations would be
members of WIGO, replicating same at the country level.
It is necessary to emphasis here that the Internet ecosystem should maintain the
multistakeholder approach, which has so far worked, in the ‘Future of Internet
Governance’. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) has
so far provided a stage for multi-stakeholderism approach for governing the internet, save
for the legal instrument establishing it. The future Internet Governance should therefore
adopt same approach in the new organization.
I propose that ICANN be changed to WIGO with all its functions, this will reduce the
learning curve period of the new organisation, and nations would have equal say in the
Future Internet Governance.
Since internet governance is a new phenomenon, education of the Net Citizens on its real
meaning is a task that must be accomplished by WIGO.