Contribution from the ICANN Cross Community Working
Group on Internet Governance
Part I: Introduction
The ICANN Cross Community Working Group (CCWG) on Internet Governance drafted
this contribution using multistakeholder principles. The CCWG is an ad-hoc group
comprised of members of ICANN’s Supporting Organisations (Address Supporting
Organisation - ASO; Country Code Domain Name Supporting Organization - ccNSO;
Generic Names Supporting Organization - GNSO) and Advisory Committees (At-Large
Advisory Committee - ALAC; Governmental Advisory Committee - GAC; and Security
and Stability Advisory Committee - SSAC) as well as GNSO Stakeholder Groups and
constituencies. This bottom-up process involved up to five people from each of these
groups that comprise ICANN’s volunteer community. The concepts expressed in this
paper resulted from discussion on the CCWG’s mailing list, input provided through the
CCWG Wiki space,1 and weekly conference calls from January - March 2014.
Due to time pressures, the proposals expressed in this contribution have not yet been
reviewed by the respective SOs, ACs and SGs of ICANN. They are therefore the
opinions solely of the authors. Further communication will advise the NetMundial
Organizing Committee if such ratification occurs before the meeting in Brazil.
As the CCWG is commenting on ICANN, and on ICANN's role within the larger Internet
Governance Ecosystem in preparation for a contribution to the NETMundial
Conference, these comments should be viewed as preliminary and focused on the
entities within the IG Ecosystem that we have been able to consider in the short
timeframe for preparing this submission. It is possible that further collaboration may
lead to changes and enhancements to the CCWG views.
Part II: Internet Principles
Declarations
2.1 The ICANN multistakeholder, bottom-up, consensus-based model best serves
the Internet community.
A multistakeholder model allows all stakeholders – whether individual citizens,
businesses, Internet Service Providers, intellectual property owners, governments,
1
https://community.icann.org/display/CPMMB/ICANN+Community+Preparation+for+the+Multistakeholder+
Meeting+in+Brazil+Home
intergovernmental institutions, registrars and registries, civil society organizations, or
technical experts – to have a say in shaping the future of Internet governance.
Because all members of the Internet community are affected by Internet governance,
we should all contribute to its development. Moreover, the multistakeholder model has
enabled and fostered the astonishingly rapid growth of the Internet as a critical platform
for innovation, creativity, commerce, and the exchange of information and ideas. If we
continue to refine and improve the multistakeholder model, we will ensure that the
Internet continues to grow and flourish in the future. Again, within the multistakeholder
model different stakeholders will take the lead on particular matters based on their
competency and mandate, but transparency and dialogue are key to the success of
multistakeholder processes.
Within ICANN, the multistakeholder model works in a bottom-up, consensus-based and
inclusive manner that lets every participant be heard and taken into consideration in the
decision-making process. Most initiatives emerge in the communities of stakeholders
and the ICANN Advisory Committees and are supported by ICANN staff. The public
comment process plays a very important role for this model, not only because it gives
transparency to the work done by the different communities and stakeholder groups,
but because it provides the essential feedback loop that is key to bottom-up,
consensus-based, multistakeholder governance.
ICANN has continuously improved its multistakeholder model and should continue to do
so. There should be no barriers for participation and outreach efforts should continue to
include under-represented groups.
Numerous other multistakeholder mechanisms exist. We offer two examples below:
The Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) also use a multistakeholder model to manage,
distribute and register Internet resources within their respective regions. There are five
RIRs:
? AFRINIC : Providing services in Africa
? APNIC : Providing services in Asia Pacific
? ARIN : Providing services in North America and the Caribbean
? LACNIC : Providing services in Latin America and the Caribbean
? RIPE NCC : Providing services in Europe, the Middle East and parts of Central
Asia
RIR Communities develop the policies for how resources should be delegated within
their respective regions. The RIR Policy Development Processes are documented and
are openly accessible by everyone. All policies, as well as the discussions that led to
their developments, are documented and archived in the respective RIR web pages. In
order to carry out their work, RIRs also support and work with technical communities
that understand infrastructure issues first hand.
The Internet Governance Forum (IGF) also exemplifies multistakeholder collaboration.
It was created to be a space for policy dialogue, where participants from all stakeholder
groups engage on an equal footing and have an equal opportunity to express
themselves. The IGF mandate encompasses, among other things, facilitating the
exchange of information and best practices, discussing public policy issues and
dialogue among bodies and actors dealing with Internet governance, strengthening and
enhancing the engagement of stakeholders, and contributing to capacity building. The
creation of the IGF was important to the development of the Internet governance model,
as it contributed to breaking down the silos among stakeholder groups, to the
emergence of a common language and common terms that facilitated understanding,
and to the identification of best practices that inspired concrete action at the regional
and at national levels.
2.2 The CCWG supports an Internet with a single root.
A single root is needed to ensure global uniqueness regarding names in the namespace
created by the delegated administration and allocation of unique names. Proposals by
certain other organisations contemplate the possibility of shared or multiple roots. The
CCWG believes that only a single root will guarantee global uniqueness and deter
fragmentation of the Internet.
2.3 The CCWG supports a unique Internet.
The Internet is made up of hundreds of thousands of networks. These networks
connect to each other thanks to a globally unique IP address space. Without this, the
Internet would be fragmented. Only parties connected to the same IP based network
with a globally unique IP address space can communicate with each other.
2.4 The CCWG supports best practices that enhance Internet security.
We support best practices that improve Internet security. For example, Domain Name
System SECurity (DNSSEC) makes it possible for a person receiving a response from a
DNS query to validate that the response is authoritative and that the signed data has
not been changed during transport. However, these policies should be developed in a
multistakeholder context with adequate input from all stakeholders, especially the
technical experts, the business community and civil society, each of which play a key
role in development and implementation of these best practices. Moreover, the
participation of all stakeholders is important to ensure that measures designed to
protect the security, stability, resiliency, and interoperability of the Internet do not get
overly politicized.
2.5 The CCWG supports transparency in Internet governance discussions.
The CCWG supports transparency in Internet governance discussions. All discussions
on aspects of Internet governance should be supported by full, inclusive and
transparent consultation with all affected stakeholders.
Part III: Future Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
Roadmap Contributions
3.1 Evolution of ICANN: principles by which ICANN should evolve.
ICANN plays a key role in keeping the Internet operational, by managing globally
unique identifiers. The Internet is a trans-border and shared resource, and ICANN
should contribute to its stability, robustness and interoperability, acting in a way that is
consistent with the common good. This means that ICANN should carry out its
stewardship role “caring more for the good management, use and evolution of this
shared resource than for any individual stake in it” (CERF at al., 2014).
ICANN is deeply connected to the web of relationships among institutions and actors
that are part of the Internet governance ecosystem. The functions it performs are
fundamental to the work carried out by other organizations and, ultimately, to keeping
the Internet running. This is a great responsibility and ICANN is constantly striving to
improve its governance model to better carry out its mission. The recent launch of the
Strategy Panels -- on ICANN Multistakeholder Innovation; on ICANN’s role in the
Internet Organizations’ Ecosystem; on the Public Responsibility Framework; and on
Identifier Technology Innovation -- demonstrate these efforts, as do the accountability
and transparency reviews. ICANN seeks to keep evolving together with the Internet
governance ecosystem.
In order to ensure that this evolution happens in the best possible manner, some
general principles need to be observed:
? Evolution must be driven by the ICANN Community. ICANN has a unique
multistakeholder model and a bottom-up process of decision-making. The
evolution of the organization must be based on input from the community.
ICANN’s board should perform its tasks in ongoing consultation with the
community.
? Evolution should support the participation of a broader range of actors from all
sectors, especially those from developing regions.
? Transparency and accountability are key to all actions by the ICANN Board,
ICANN Staff, and the ICANN community.
? Globalization plans for ICANN must be developed with stakeholder support and
take into account impact on stakeholders.
? Negotiations with the US Department of Commerce on the future of ICANN
should take into account input received from the community.
3.2 Evolution of ICANN: Globalization of ICANN
Non-governmental administration of the DNS has been a long-standing goal that has
not yet been fully realized. Since 1999, ICANN has been a contractor with the United
States government for performing the IANA functions, while the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) is tasked with the function
of “administrator” under this contract. Although important steps towards increasing
ICANN’s independence were taken with the Affirmation of Commitments (AoC), an
agreement between ICANN and the US Department of Commerce, the US Government
still maintains an oversight role over ICANN’s compliance with the AoC and takes that
into account at the time of IANA contract renewal. While some actors believe that the
relationship with the US Government has brought stability, concerns have also been
raised, based on concerns of trust and lack of equality among countries. So far, the
proposal that has garnered the most support has been the “globalization” of ICANN,
keeping it accountable to all stakeholders, although there is disagreement on what that
would entail, other than replacement of the US Government as IANA contract
counterparty. The bottom line is that the way forward for the organization must be
discussed with the ICANN community and carried out after careful reflection.
ICANN is currently subject to the laws of the State of California. The Affirmation of
Commitments requires ICANN to remain headquartered in the United States of
America. The AOC can be canceled by either party upon provision of 120 days’ notice.
Some nation-states and some members of the ICANN community have called for the
globalization of the IANA function part of ICANN.
Administration of the root zone function should meet several criteria: (1) protection of
root zone management from political or other improper interference; (2) integrity,
stability, continuity, security and robustness of the administration of the root zone; (3)
widespread trust by Internet users in the administration of this function; (4) support for a
public, globally unified DNS namespace; and (5) agreement regarding an accountability
mechanism for this function.
The current IANA contract with the US NTIA satisfies these criteria, but some believe
there is a potential political dimension to the administration of this function. Equally,
some in the ICANN stakeholder community also believe that such globalization is not
needed at the present time.
At present, the ICANN Board has voted to explore the options possible in the
globalization of the IANA function part of ICANN. Again, these options must be
discussed with the ICANN community.
3.3 International Frameworks for ICANN’s Accountability
ICANN is currently accountable through the AoC. Any globalization of ICANN would
require the creation of a new framework for ICANN’s accountability. It is the position of
the CCWG that here again, the ICANN stakeholder community must be consulted at all
levels of the design of such a framework, should this be decided.
Part IV: Conclusions
The ICANN stakeholder community is a microcosm of the world’s diversity of
population. It has years of experience in developing operational policy that serves the
Internet by operating an evolving but stable set of names, addresses and protocols.
Operation of ICANN as a bottom-up, consensus-based, multistakeholder model has
both been a challenge and a success, judged by the fact that for the 15 years of
ICANN’s existence, the DNS has performed as it should and its Top Level Domain
space continues to grow. The diversity of ICANN’s stakeholder communities will often
cause disagreements among its various components, but ICANN has provided a
wonderful platform open to everyone for engagement and a search for the common
good -- to find a solution to the challenges that any network growing at the pace of the
Internet would face.
The ICANN stakeholder community is an inherent part of all of the global Internet
communities. The CCWG looks forward to continuing to work to make ICANN a better
organization.
Appendix A: Definitions of the terms used
In this section, we provide a backgrounder on the definitions that we attribute to certain
terms used in this contribution. The definitions of these terms are not meant to serve as
universal definitions but rather as the meaning of those terms in the context of this
contribution in order to avoid ambiguity.
What is a multistakeholder model?
The Multistakeholder Model (MsM), as opposed to the Multilateral Model (MlM), which
we describe in more detail below, provides all interested parties a voice in critical
decision-making processes. Within the MsM, different stakeholders may take the lead
on particular matters based on their competency and mandate, but transparency and
dialogue are key to the success of multistakeholder processes. Within the context of
ICANN, the multistakeholder model refers to the bottom-up, consensus-based process
by which stakeholders who participate in ICANN develop policies related to Internet
naming and numbering, as well as policies to support the security, stability, and
interoperability of the global Internet. Participants in ICANN’s multistakeholder model
include businesses, civil society organizations, individual Internet users, technical
experts and governments, each with their respective roles. In the MsM, any individual
or organization may voice an opinion, and ideally, all opinions and ideas are considered
on their own merits.
What is a multilateral model?
The Multilateral Model (MlM) is a decision-making process wherein nation-states or a
closed stakeholder group negotiate policy among themselves. In an ideal process, the
negotiating parties are expected to voice the interests of their citizens or members.
Due to the closed nature of the process, citizens, businesses, civil society organizations
and technical experts cannot participate directly in decision-making in a multilateral
decision making process. Some multilateral organizations do offer consultative status
to non-governmental stakeholders that may or may not be binding for the parties raising
the consultation. The OECD is an example of a governmental multilateral body while
FIFA or the FiA may be seen as private sector multilateral bodies.
ICANN Component Organizations
Address Supporting Organization (ASO)
The ASO is the body that advises the ICANN Board regarding policy issues relating to
the operation, assignment, and management of Internet addresses - otherwise known
at Internet Protocol Addresses (IP addresses). Every computer or other device
connected to the Internet needs an IP address.
Country Code Names Supporting Organization (ccNSO)
The ccNSO is the policy-development body responsible for: (i) developing and
recommending to the Board global policies relating to country-code top-level domains;
(ii) nurturing consensus across the ccNSO's community, including the name-related
activities of ccTLDs; and (iii) coordinating with other ICANN Supporting Organizations,
committees, and constituencies under ICANN.
Generic Names Supporting Organization (GNSO)
The GNSO is responsible for developing and recommending to the ICANN Board
substantive policies relating to generic Top Level Domains (gTLDs); it does so through
the Policy Development Process. Changes to gTLD policy have broad impact beyond
the gTLD-related businesses (registries and registrars) that contract with ICANN, to
other stakeholders and ultimately to all users of the Internet.
GNSO stakeholders are organized into four “Stakeholder Groups”: registries, registrars,
commercial stakeholders and noncommercial stakeholders. The Intellectual Property,
Internet Service Provider and Commercial and Business User constituencies are in the
Commercial Stakeholder Group, while the non-profit and non-commercial user
constituencies are in the Non-Commercial Stakeholder Group. The GNSO Council,
consisting of representatives of each Stakeholder Group, manages the PDP process
and approves policy recommendations from GNSO Working Groups, which develop the
recommendations.
One of the unique aspects of the GNSO is that the PDP is bottom-up, consensusbased,
and stakeholder-driven, and depends on extensive stakeholder involvement in
multistakeholder Working Groups. Working Groups are the heart of the GNSO and the
PDP. Working Groups are formed via Charters, which define the specific issues that
each group will address. While Working Groups typically have representatives from
each Stakeholder Group and liaisons from other ICANN bodies (e.g., ALAC and the
ccNSO), anyone can participate. Working Groups operate by consensus and develop
detailed policy recommendations through meetings and the development of a
substantial report. Preliminary reports are subject to public comment, which are taken
into account when preparing the final report. The recommendations in the Working
Group reports, once approved by the GNSO Council, are sent to the Board for adoption
as ICANN gTLD policy.
At-Large Advisory Committee (ALAC)
"At-Large" is the name for the community of individual Internet users who participate in
the policy development work of ICANN. The 15 member At-Large Advisory Committee
(ALAC) is responsible for considering and providing advice on the activities of ICANN
as they relate to the interests of individual Internet users (the “At-Large” community).
ICANN, as a private sector non-profit corporation with technical management
responsibilities for the Internet’s domain name and address system, relies on the ALAC
and the broader At-Large community to involve and represent in ICANN a broad set of
individual Internet user interests.
Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC)
The GAC provides advice on the activities of ICANN as they relate to concerns of
governments, particularly matters where there may be interaction between ICANN's
policies and various laws and international agreements or where ICANN’s policies may
affect public policy issues. According to ICANN’s Bylaws, “GAC advice on public policy
matters shall be duly taken into account, both in the formulation and adoption of
policies. If the Board determines to take an action that is not consistent with the GAC
advice, it shall so inform the Committee and state the reasons why it decided not to
follow that advice”.
Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC)
The SSAC advises the ICANN community and Board on matters relating to the security
and integrity of the Internet's naming and address allocation systems, which
encompasses operational matters (e.g., matters pertaining to the correct and reliable
operation of the root name system), administrative matters (e.g., matters pertaining to
address allocation and Internet number assignment), and registration matters (e.g.,
matters pertaining to registry and registrar services such as WHOIS). SSAC engages in
ongoing threat assessment and risk analysis of the Internet naming and address
allocation services to assess where the principal threats to stability and security lie, and
advises the ICANN community accordingly.
Root Server System Advisory Committee (RSSAC)
The RSSAC is the body that advises the ICANN community and Board on matters
relating to the operation, administration, security, and integrity of the Internet's Root
Server System.
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
The IETF’s mission is to make the Internet work better by producing high quality,
relevant technical documents that influence the way people design, use and manage
the Internet. Anyone may participate in the IETF process, making the organization truly
multistakeholder, but individuals are expected to represent only themselves, not their
companies, governments, or other organizations. Thus, individuals are expected to
bring their best ideas for the Internet rather than represent any one constituency.
Work within the IETF is organized in working groups. Working group chairs are
responsible for managing the process within the group. The process of drafting an IETF
standard typically begins at the working group level. Anyone can submit an idea for a
standard for the working group to consider. People in the working group comment on
whether to take up the work or not, and if it is agreed by consensus to take up the item,
the document becomes a working group item. The working group then jointly develops
the content of the standard itself through iteration. Once the document is largely
agreed, it goes to working group last call: at this point, everyone in the working group
reads the document and provides final feedback. If achieved, the standard goes to the
IETF as a whole for discussion and consensus before a standard becomes final.
While the IETF holds three meetings a year, much of the work associated with
developing a standard takes place over working group email lists, and working group
chairs must consult the list before determining that consensus exists. The culture of the
IETF places a premium on individuals representing themselves, not their organizations’
interests. Calls for comment are iterative and ongoing in the early stages of document
development, increasing the likelihood that major issues are considered and resolved
before last call and generally streamlining the process.
The standards developed at IETF are needed to make the Internet interoperable, and
they affect all Internet users. Because of these effects, standards development
processes must remain open to all interested parties, and decision-making should be
transparent. Accordingly, participants in IETF processes strive to maintain a level of
awareness of the potential social and economic impact of their efforts which
distinguishes the entire process from any other technical body.