Cybersecurity thoughts and issues from a political
perspective
Area: COMBINED INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES AND
ROADMAP
Entitled by: Gonzalo A Romero B
Region: Colombia
Organization: .CO Internet S.A.S.
Sector: Private Sector
Keywords: cybersecurity, awareness, capacity building, stability
Abstract
The daily life and economics of the global citizen depend each time more on a stable,
secure, and resilient cyberspace; protection of intellectual property and business/personal
sensitive information against illegal practices (theft and misuse, mainly) is getting critical
within the high-level business and operational processes and capabilities. This short but
concise paper puts forward a series of relevant issues we need to face in cyber-security in
a short and mid-term; big data, the human factor, identification, false information
published online, hacktivism, among others, are issues, terms, concepts and technologies
we want to take into account sooner than later in regard to cyber-security as individuals,
entities and enterprises. Only adopting a "forward looking" and innovative insight,
continuously reviewing, rethinking and redesigning the security framework principles,as
well as doing unknown risk exercises, the organizations will be able ensure service
continuity.
Document
According to the ITU (Guadalajara Resolution 181, 2.010), “cybersecurity” is a “set of
security tools, policies, concepts, drivers, risk management methods, actions, education,
awareness, good practices, insurances and technologies to protect users and
organization assets in cyberspace”.
As stated by the “Global Cybersecurity Center (GCSEC)”, “DNS security, stability and
resilience (DNS-SSR) have a direct and strong impact on the performance and
dependability of nearly all aspects of interactions on the Internet, including Web
applications, Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) based systems, cloud infrastructure
and distributed applications in general, which constitute a foundation for high performance
and scalable services computing, putting always more demands on the DNS
infrastructure, by increasing requirements for higher performance and improved
dependability”. DNS-SSR needs more and better efforts on awareness and tech capacity
building/training: “Gaps in talent always means Gaps in security”. ICANN SSR Working
Group, as well as Global & Regional organizations like LACTLD, LACNIC and ISOC, and
also ccTLD’s and TLD Registrars are working hard on this at this time.
“Big Data” rapid adoption, defined as exponential volume and complexity of data under
management, is drastically changing the way “online privacy” needs to be handled and
guaranteed. New generic TLD’s (nTLD's) economy and business will impose a lot of
challenges to cybersecurity as well, in particular to the Internet’s Domain Name System
(DNS).
The weakest element in information security is the HUMAN factor. As a result,
organizations need to constantly improve their awareness programs (employees must be
more conscious of their information security responsibilities and appropriate use of assets,
IP data and technology; info-sec should be part of their performance assessment) and
introducing new security instruments: examples can be (a) 2-step authentication for high
visible enterprise (PR, marketing, channel management) profiles, (b) sharing passwords
strongly prohibited (to avoid cases like Snowden gaining admin/social confidence with
NSA workers). 80% of the solution is NON-TECHNICAL, it’s case of “good IT, Security,
Operations and Business Governance”.
In terms of cybersecurity framework and strategy deployment, there are good ways for
government, civil society and private sector to share information and work toward same
goals and challenges: a strong and aligned cooperation effort involving relevant
stakeholders is urgently needed globally, regionally and in-country, especially to work
together on hardening critical infrastructures, fight against cyber-crime and cyberdelinquency,
as well as stability and resilience issues.
“Identification” is one of the most relevant challenges in cybersecurity today (specially for
Law Enforcement and National Security agencies): services helping individuals and
organizations for “going dark” by handling network anonymity and identity, particularly in
“domain names”, as well as advanced encryption and wiretapping techniques, give
particular interest benefits but contribute fraudulent, illegal, abusive and malicious activity
to increase in cyberspace.
False information published online, as a result of human mistakes or deliberate actions,
could have complex social, political and economic consequences to actors involved (i.e.,
hacking to AP twitter’s account for publishing fake information about White-House
explosion and U.S. President’s injury caused stock and marketing uncertainty).
Several countries recognize cyber-attacks more dangerous to their national security than
terrorist ones, and face them as serious threats to the country safety from a political,
economic, social and technological perspective.
“Hacktivism” seen as the usage of IT hacking methods to stage protests and make
political statements, is another big challenge for today’s cybersecurity: political activists,
cyber-insurgents and mischief makers continue to increase DDoS attacks and take
advantage of IT vulnerabilities every day.
Individuals and organizations needs to understand cybersecurity is not just a
technological and compliance issue; it’s a business risk that implies and requires an
enterprise-wide approach and an innovative approach and response to the unknown
challenges new technologies bring ahead.
Inaction or inappropriate preventive and proactive personal/corporate information security
measures, as well as not making nor maintaining framework based and continuously
reviewed, rethought and potentially redesigned policies, can lead to seriously affect the
image/brand and reputation, disrupt business and operational continuity and lead to a
host of financial and legal issues.
Every organization’s member needs to fully understand and be conscious of the overall
consequences of cybersecurity breaches: theft of funds, data leakage/loss, Intellectual
Property (IP) are not the only inherent risks associated with; there are costs associated
with losses of profits and business as well as the high expenses associated with
remediation.
Breaches eventually could derail key objectives, undermine the confidence of
shareholders, analysts and customers, and affect business and operational continuity,
financial performance, ultimately reducing revenue and company’s overall market value.
For as much progress as organizations have made, many of them still have a long way to
go. As the rate and complexity of cybersecurity incidents continue to increase, they need
to act quickly to avoid leaving themselves exposed to a costly and brand-damaging
security incident that shakes the confidence of consumers and shareholders.
People and organizations aspiring to be “information security innovators” need to set their
sights on new frontiers. They need to continuously review, rethink and potentially
redesign their entire information security framework in order to be better prepared. In
many cases, innovating may require a fundamental transformation of the information
security program to proactively fortify against both the known and the unknown risks in the
cyber risk environment: “the future”.
Organizations need to be more “forward-looking” in cybersecurity. As being ready to
handle security and risk considerations with “digital devices” (smartphones and tablets,
software applications, web/mobile-based apps) and “social media” (a digital business
enabler and networking facilitator), they should have been preparing for current
technologies as they were appearing on the horizon.
Finally, if resources are still working to improve capabilities for emerging technologies and
trends that are right in front of organizations or already behind them, then they will have
no time to prepare a defense that proactively protects the organization from technologies
that are just (a) “around the corner”: big data, enterprise app store (which encompasses
associated costs vs. increased productivity of employee request for apps), supply chain
management (in the context of how external assets like customers, suppliers, vendors,
contractors and partners impact security), cloud service brokerage (how brokers/partners
manage cloud security, privacy and compliance issues), “bring your own cloud”, as well as
those which about to appear (b) “on the horizon”: in-memory computing (data storage in
RAM instead of DB’s allowing real-time analysis of high-volume data), Internet of things,
digital money (and regulations and legislation required to address fraud and money
laundering issues related with mobile money services) and cyber-heavens (where
countries provide data hosting without onerous regulations).