ICT Industry Recommendations for Securing a Robust,
Flexible and Stable Internet
Area: ROADMAP FOR THE FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
GOVERNANCE ECOSYSTEM
Entitled by: Maria Medrano
Region: United States of America
Organization: Internet Governance Working Group/ITI
Sector: Technical community
Keywords: Information technology Industry Council
Abstract
The Internet community does not lack for places to discuss key Internet policy and
governance questions. Rather, a critical concern voiced by some stakeholders is that the
assortment of organizations and overlapping missions is confusing and difficult to
navigate without considerable time and effort. While these concerns are valid, they should
not necessarily lead to the conclusion that all Internet policy discussions must take place
in one body. Rather, we must find a way to take advantage of the richness of the
ecosystem while making it easier to navigate, especially for new entrants
Document
The Internet Governance Working Group of the Information Technology Industry Council
(ITI) respectfully submits this paper regarding our recommendations for a Roadmap for
Further Evolution of the Internet Governance Ecosystem for consideration at the
“Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance” or NETmundial
parties. We applaud the Brazilian Government for taking this initiative to bring together
stakeholders from around the world to discuss the important subject of Internet
governance. ITI is the premier advocacy and policy organization for the world’s leading
innovation companies.
Our members pioneer cutting-edge products and services that improve people’s daily
lives, and maintain investments, supply chains and operations around the world. As a
result, we have an acute understanding of the impact of international policies can have on
the Internet and the World Wide Web. In recent years, some governments have argued
that a multilateral, rather than a multistakeholder, model for Internet governance would
better serve public policy objectives. The multistakeholder model approach to Internet
governance and technical management has allowed the Internet to grow and flourish into
the critical global platform it is today, and we believe it will continue to best serve Internet
users far into the future. As we see it, there are two main challenges before us. First, we
must ensure the Internet governance model continues to evolve in a manner that allows
all stakeholders to have a voice in critical policy discussions.
The Internet is expected to serve 90-95% of the world’s population by 2030. Uses of the
Internet continue to grow and diversify. Second, all actors have a common interest in the
security, stability and interoperability of the overall infrastructure. However, no one actor
or organization has the capacity to address all of the various public policy and technical
issues impacting the Internet and its users. Because Internet governance is multifaceted –
spanning technical, political, and policy issues – there is no single organization that
manages or has jurisdiction over all Internet governance questions; instead, the Internet’s
policies and protocols have rapidly evolved through a set of diverse organizations.
Together, the robust set of multistakeholder Internet institutions – ICANN, IETF, ISOC,
etc. – each with different core functions and strengths, address nearly all Internet policy
and technical issues. Nevertheless, there is still room for improvement, and the ICT
industry welcomes the opportunity to work with all stakeholders to help create an even
more robust, flexible and stable Internet.
Areas for Improvement
The Internet community does not lack for places to discuss key Internet policy and
governance questions. Rather, a critical concern voiced by some stakeholders is that the
assortment of organizations and overlapping missions is confusing and difficult to
navigate without considerable time and effort. While these concerns are valid, they
should not necessarily lead to the conclusion that all Internet policy discussions must take
place in one body. Rather, we must find a way to take advantage of the richness of the
ecosystem while making it easier to navigate, especially for new entrants. It is incumbent
on participants within the current governance model to bring new stakeholders whose
voices may not be effectively heard into the conversation.
Increased outreach, capacity building and training for regulators.
While many if not all of the technical meetings are inclusive of all participants, the majority
of the meetings historically have taken place in the developed world and their processes
can be difficult to grasp as a newcomer. We applaud recent efforts undertaken by the
IETF and ISOC to increase the global reach of their meetings as well as offer fellowships
to engineers and policymakers from the developing world. We would support similar
efforts in this space in other fora as these present important opportunities to engage
thought leaders globally. Increase outreach to and participation of newcomers.
International organizations should make it easier for newer participants to meaningfully
engage in their processes. To do this, these organizations should offer training and
newcomer sessions both at their physical meetings and remotely as a means of
introducing more people to the organizations and encouraging them to participate in
critical Internet governance discussions.
Improve transparency and accountability.
Multilateral organizations whose missions touch the Internet (e.g., UNESCO, OECD, UN,
and ITU) should provide better transparency and accountability in their decision-making
processes, and how the overall decisions impact the Internet, and appropriately include
other stakeholders in those decision making processes. All Internet governance
institutions should strive to make relevant governance and policy documents available to
all stakeholders at no cost. Participation in board and governance meetings of Internet
governance organizations should be open whenever possible. For many participants, it is
difficult and often cost-prohibitive to attend meetings in person. For that reason, Internet
governance institutions should strive to improve remote participation opportunities.
Other Potential Risks to the Future of the Internet
We would be remiss if did not also address other factors that could have a negative
impact on the future of the Internet and on any nation’s ability to leverage the Internet in
order to reap the benefits of the digital economy. These include national policy initiatives
that could restrict information flows and require that only in-country data servers be used
to process and store the bits and bytes that fuel the digital economy. We believe that
such “solutions” could actually impede a country’s ability to strengthen/uphold privacy
protections and security, while also creating significant obstacles to expanding online
commerce and digital trade. Data localization mandates could leave nations even more
vulnerable to security risks. Data security is not a question of server location, but rather
depends upon the mechanisms and controls in place to safeguard the data. These
mandates would essentially cut off businesses and consumers from the world’s most
cutting edge technology and technology solutions. It would also restrict the ability of local
technology companies, technical experts and researchers to partner with entities in other
countries, and thereby limit their ability to leverage the Internet to expand job opportunities
and business start-ups.
It could also harm the ability to grow its domestic technology dependent industries, such
as ICT services, banking, and manufacturing. Ultimately, the adoption of such policies
could embolden other countries to implement reciprocal policies, leading to a fragmented
Internet with country after country walling off their digital ecosystems. Data security and
privacy issues are very real and urgent; we share these concerns. However, risks to
global commerce and the free flow of information are also very real and urgent.
Commerce and security and privacy do not have to be mutually exclusive. With balanced
and thoughtful policies, developed via increased bilateral, multilateral, and
multistakeholder cooperation, nations can achieve both, and create a digital ecosystem
that enables their businesses and citizens to thrive and grow in our interconnected global
economy. ITI would welcome the opportunity to work with governments and other
stakeholders to address these important goals.
Conclusion
The phenomenal success of the Internet is due in no small part to the multistakeholder
governance model that guides technology and policy decisions. A variety of organizations
that include participation from businesses, civil society organizations, government
representatives and technical experts have followed this de facto blueprint to manage the
exponential growth of the Internet throughout the world, creating a flexible infrastructure
that has successfully absorbed new technologies and demands in a seamless and costeffective
manner. This multistakeholder collaboration has produced a stable, predictable
environment that has helped facilitate continuing innovation and attract investments that
have spread economic benefits around the globe, benefitting developed and developing
economies alike. We believe that the existing system of governance for the Internet is
effective and inclusive, and for this reason, it should continue to be improved and
reinforced. We welcome inquiries and feedback from all stakeholders regarding our views,
and look forward to hearing and considering the views of other stakeholders on this
important topic.
Thank your for your consideration.
For Further Information: +202-737-8888
Ms. Maria Medrano | mmedrano(at)itic.org Mr. Ken J. Salaets | ksalaets(at)itic.org