Understanding ICANN?s complexity in a growing and
changing Internet
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Cecilia Testart
Region: USA
Organization: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sector: Academia
Keywords: ICANN, change, expansion, process, governance
Abstract
ICANN has been the institution in charge of coordination, management and policymaking
related to the technical functions of the Internet since 1998. At its creation, ICANN
was expected to have a technical mandate. However, its scope reached the political and
economical world, and changes in its structure where introduced, resulting in a large,
complex institution, with several internal bodies intermingled in its functions. This paper
contributes to the understanding of who participates in ICANN?s decision-making and
policy development processes and how since its creation. The study is based on an indepth
analysis of the legal and public documents of ICANN. This study reveals the
substantial expansion of ICANN mandate and activities since its creation and how its
policy development processes have allowed it to absorb Internet ecosystem evolution.
The capacity of adapting to and absorbing change is a critical principle that should be
promoted for the evolution of Internet governance
Document
Executive Summary
The ever-increasing relevance of the Internet in all aspects of our lives –reaching over 2.7
billion users around the world, has significantly raised the interest of cyberspace in the
political, economical and international spheres. Internet governance and the future design
of the Internet are now relevant to many different stakeholders eagers to engage and
influence the decision-making and policy-making process.
The Internet Corporations for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) is recognized as
the central institution involved in the governance of the global Internet. Specifically, it is in
charge of the allocation and coordination of the critical Internet resources –Internet
Protocol addresses, Domain Names System and protocols, and of policy development
related to this function.
At its creation, ICANN was expected to have a technical mandate. However, as its scope
reached the political and economical world, changes in its structure where introduced,
resulting in a large and complex institution, with several internal bodies intermingled in its
functions. The in-depth analysis of the legal, financial and public documents of ICANN, as
well as the information and documents published directly by ICANN’s internal bodies,
reveals the substantial expansion in scale and scope of ICANN mandate and activities
since its creation.
Clearly, ICANN has succeeded in creating a structure where Internet users, companies,
not-for-profit organizations, Internet service providers, registries, registrars, Top-Level
domain managers, Regional Internet Registries, other organizations in the Internet
governance ecosystem and even government and treaty organizations have a place to
contribute in policy development concerning the global Internet. ICANN has seven internal
bodies where these different constituencies are spread and sometimes mixed.
Additionally, ICANN has been the institution in charge of coordinating and managing the
technical functions of the Internet, as well as policy making related to these functions
since 1998. When it was created, there were less than 10% of the current total Internet
users and the World Wide Web potential was just emerging. At that time, most of social
interactions through the Internet were done by email or other messaging systems such as
Microsoft Messenger and ICQ. Even today, a very limited number of Internet users know
what ICANN is or what ICANN does. Very seldom does an Internet user asks his or
herself who runs the top-level management of IP addresses, of top-level domains, of
protocols and other parameters, because the Internet works.
ICANN has been able to cope and adapt to growth, evolution and change of the Internet
and its usages. ICANN complex and iterative processes for policy development building
bottom up from its constituencies, has allowed it to absorb and act accordingly to changes
and evolution. Additionally, this same complex network organizing constituencies in
internal bodies and external organizations that collaborate with ICANN is an outreach
mechanism for ICANN to its constituencies, providing necessary buy-in for the policy
development processes in place.
However, although ICANN has only two categories of internal bodies, there are tangible
differences in the involvement of these two categories in ICANN’s functions and with
ICANN policy development and decision-making processes. Moreover, as some
constituencies did not engaged as described in the bylaws, the different stakeholders do
not have the same power or influence in ICANN. For instance, one of the main links of
ICANN with the International System is the Governmental Advisory Committee, which fails
to be a sufficient mechanism for many governments. This committee is in the delicate
position of being an advisory committee but with more influence and internal links than
other structures. However, it uses them seldom. This difference and internal inequality will
possibly be sources of future contentions.
Adding to this complexity is the fact that not all ICANN’s internal bodies were created at
the same time, nor use the same instrument as definition. Hence, there is not a unified
document where the principles governing the structure and work of ICANN are clearly
exposed. ICANN’s reforms of 2002, as well as some ongoing processes, addressed and
are addressing this issue in an effort to reconcile the governing principles with the
operation of the institution.
As a conclusion, a critical principle the Internet governance of the future has to consider is
the capacity of absorbing and adapting to change; but, at the same time, its processes
and the role of its different organizations have to be clearly stated and represent the real
mechanisms. There are still more than three billion potential new Internet users on the
world and many new usage trends are just emerging. What would be the killer Internet
application in ten years? The new Internet governance system has to be able to enable it
and evolve with it, and the different actors of Internet governance have to understand their
role in the process.