A Collaboratively Developed Set of Principles for Internet
Governance, 8 March 2014
Area: SET OF INTERNET GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES
Entitled by: Joy Liddicoat
Region: New Zealand
Organization: Association for Progressive Communications
Sector: Civil Society
Keywords: Human rights, openness, resilience, diversity
Abstract
The Internet provides an open, decentralised platform for communication, collaboration,
innovation, creativity, and economic, cultural, social and political expression and
development. It is an enabler of human rights, and can contribute to a more peaceful and
world and greater social equality. This document is an edited compilation of principles
contained in the following documents, many which have been submitted independently to
NetMundial. It was developed by a small group of individuals who have been active in
Internet governance processes for many years.
Document
A Collaboratively Developed Set of Principles for Internet Governance, 8 March
2014
PREAMBLE
The Internet provides an open, decentralised platform for communication, collaboration,
innovation, creativity, and economic, cultural, social and political expression and
development. It is an enabler of human rights, and can contribute to a more peaceful and
world and greater social equality.
This document is an edited compilation of principles contained in the following documents,
many which have been submitted independently to NetMundial. It was developed by a
small group of individuals have been active in Internet governance processes for many
years.
The documents referred to include statements of principles for Internet governance or
policy-making from the following networks and institutions:
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
Council of Europe (CoE)
Association for Progressive Communications (APC)
Internet Rights and Principles Coalition (IRPC)
Internet Society (ISOC)
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
“Necessary and Proportionate” - International Principles on the Application of Human
Rights to Communications Surveillance
The Brazilian Internet Steering Group (CGI.BR)
Global Network Initiative (GNI)
1. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES THAT SHOULD UNDERPIN INTERNET
GOVERNANCE
Human rights and the rule of law
The governance of the Internet must be based upon, guided by and respectful of human
rights, and particularly freedom of expression, association and the right to privacy
supported by the rule of law. The Internet must remain open and inclusive so that users
may benefit from all that it offers.
Resilience and interoperability
The Internet must remain resilient and interoperable, underpinned by international
standards and associated technical measures developed in open and inclusive processes
Diversity
The Internet is an open and inclusive medium that must respect and promote diversity in
all its forms.
A global resource
The Internet must remain an un-fragmented, scalable and accessible global medium for
the benefit of all.
2. PRINCIPLES FOR PROCESSES AND PARTICIPATION IN THE GOVERNANCE OF
THE INTERNET
Transparency and accountability
Decision-shaping and decision-making in Internet governance should be open,
comprehensible and accountable.
Openness
Internet governance processes should be open to interested parties, accessible to all
including those not present in person and should welcome and encourage participation
from around the globe.
Inclusive participation
Internet governance should be undertaken on a multi-stakeholder basis, enabling the full
and equal participation of all stakeholders.
Collaboration and cooperation
Internet governance should be based on and encourage collaborative and cooperative
approaches to policy development that reflect the inputs and interests of stakeholders.
Empowerment of users
Internet governance should have as a core driver the goal of enabling users around the
globe to realize their human rights and to access the Internet to realize their social and
economic potential.
Distributed governance
The Internet’s global reach is best served by governance characterized by decentralized
and multi-stakeholder mechanisms and organizations.