Global Geneva’s Contribution to
NetMundial Section 2:
Roadmap for further Evolution
of the Internet Governance Ecosystem
By Jean-Christophe NOTHIAS, editor, and chief strategist at Global
Geneva.
Global Geneva is a Swiss non profit, based and registered in
Geneva since 2011. As a think-tank, it dedicates most of its efforts
observing and thinking beyond international relations, what are
‘global politics’, and transnational and global governance. Global
Geneva is a member of the Coalition for a Just and Equitable
Internet, and a signatory of the Just Net Coalition contribution to
the Sao Paulo Conference (April 2014) related to Internet
Governance Principles. Will this contribution be known as the
JustNet Principles, as we discovered the NetMundial Principles
edited by 1Net, a new born grouping launched by ICANN in 2013
and partner of the conference? Having already NetMundial
Principles even before NetMundial has happened is somehow
puzzling. Let us assume that the excitement of entering this
fascinating debate was too high. Reading this contribution by
Global Geneva, one must keep in mind the Just Net Coalition
Principles.
Abstract
The future of Internet governance cannot be assimilated to the future of
ICANN. This contribution offers a fresh and thought provocative vision of a
complete new grand design. Without minimizing the importance of technical
functions such as IANA, the contribution takes a look at Internet Governance
through a more “constitutional and universal” perspective. By proposing a 2-
entity eco-system in order to protect an Internet universal Charter (principles),
and turn it into reality, this contribution is trying to bring innovation and
disruptive thinking. This contribution starts with a double assumption. It looks
at Multistakeholderism and its critic. If it is a smart tool to foster dialogue,
invented by business schools to serve corporations facing social and policy
issues, it cannot deal effectively with public policy making and social justice.
Only Democratic values, principles and processes can deliver a sustainable
governance for the Internet at a national and global level.
The Next Best Stage
for the future of Internet Governance
Is Democracy
If ‘multistakeholderism’, initiated and applied by corporate managers and
consultants in the eighties and later developed by entities like Pr. Klaus
Schwab’s WEF, is an interesting methodology born in US business schools[1]
to foster dialogue[2] among “interested parties”, over many complex issues,
Democracy and its fundamental values, principles and mechanisms are still
our best bet to ensure an Internet fair and sustainable international
governance for the common and global good. Only to that double acceptation
will it be a road ahead for a just, safe, open and distributive Internet. The
challenge is not about opposing constantly the intergovernmental
multilateralism to a so-called multistakeholder model: the challenge is
obviously to establish a governance that will primarily have in mind all
citizens, and all the users who pay their access to the Internet. The benefits to
shareholders/stakeholders are important, but we need to change our angle of
vision, and to have in our long view common values that will address a more
global understanding of why and how the Internet can benefit to all in a social
justice framework, and not just a for profit logic, in respect of Democratic
process and principles, still making the Internet technically robust, diverse
and operational. It is a difficult task, but the world has dealt successfully with
challenge of greater magnitude. As the tenants of the current eco-system are
simply trying to make a 2.0, or 3.0 Internet governance software with old and
dated, sometimes vague concepts, we believe that time has come for a fresh
thinking.
The editors of this contribution being French citizens, the way this submission
is conceived is necessarily molded out of their origins and culture. We
apologize for that. It is therefore neither an anglo-saxon thinking nor dress-up,
and the author apologized for twisting any reader's mind due to this franc and
opinionated élan. This submission was made out of any concern to collect
“+1” or self approval by partisans, to accommodate any grouping or factions,
and with no desire to please or not to please any entity or authority. It is a
contribution to the debate. Not a campaigning initiative. After a “Wrong Turn
in the Internet Governance” in the late nineties as described, by Pr. Milton
Mueller, it is today a great challenge for all citizens and honest politicians to
be back thoughtfully in Internet Governance. A technical approach (“make it
work, document it later" or a business approach (multistakeholderism) is not
what governance is about. Today Internet is fully related to politics. This is
good news for politics, as this future Internet governance will influence the
making of better global politics.
The author’s choice was not to address a specific ICANN/IANA issue, which is a
serious but rather small part of the current challenge. The conference,
organized by Brazil and ICANN, is about the “future of Internet Governance”,
not the future of ICANN itself. A ‘big picture’ approach seemed to be
appropriate to deliver a more universal and balanced proposition. A grand
design is sometimes a good way to assess the entire scope of concern, and,
indeed, it has often delivered better lasting solution. Reforming the League of
Nations was a much too difficult task – what can be done when an American
president launched an idea that his US Congress refused to ratify? In that a
very complex case, creating a full new entity, with a grand design wit, was a
much greater success, and ultimately has kept until now warmongers mostly
deprived of their globalizing dark temptation.
1_Critics to the current state of Internet
governance
Internet governance is transiting a difficult time, and there is now an
unavoidable necessity for Democracies to stand for their citizen rights, wellbeing
and prosperity.
The global critic to the current state of Internet system of governance, which
is largely characterized as “asymmetric”, has roots into a few major concerns
such as:
_1.1 : When it comes to governance, the ‘multiskateholder’ model has proved
that it does not exist. Everyone can enjoy and understand what a MS
approach is, which can be assimilated to a process convening or selfconvening
as many stakeholders, if not all, to engage an open and respectful
dialogue. But this qualification doesn’t make a ‘model’, and does certainly not
bring new systemic concepts within the corpus of political science, even
though some stakeholders can’t help but putting this terminology in every
sentence, and at every corner and crossroad when passing over some
difficulty to convince others about their view on Internet governance. To this
day, there is no known or agreed definition by political science or law
academics over a so-called multistakeholder model when it comes to public
policy making. This terminology is over-played by people who pretend
Internet governance owes everything to multistakeholderism, which
appearance is often dated in 2004. Therefore critics are legitimate to
challenge conceptually, ideologically, historically and politically
multistakeholderism as THE core principle to rule over Internet governance.
_1.2 : The need for the technical community that keeps inventing the Internet
is to be able to work, not through command, but by code consensus. Only
when the result and reality show resilience, comes time to document these
efforts. This methodology has certainly defined part of the cultural behavior of
the tech communities, as in the meantime prevented innovation and
disruption in the governance of the Internet. Can anyone test treaties,
regulation before documenting it? That would be really innovative and
disruptive but he cost for such testing would probably be politically and
socially unbearable. This successful techie approach is not appropriate to
establish a sustainable governance. Still, this is what happened when it comes
to understand the so-called “multistakeholder model”. It became documented
afterward by the tenants of the Internet’s system of governance. It is not
difficult to understand why a post-justification became a high priority as the
Internet governance was coming under scrutiny by civil society and
governments. Discussion papers edited in 2011, in partnership with Google –
the editor is currently an ICANN board member- came very late to justify and
explain why the system was the way it was i.e. ‘multistakeholder’. Amusingly,
the paper identifies a former UN Secretary General as the ‘one’ who inspired
the multistakeholder model back in 2004. It would be worth asking the
renowned Ghanaian diplomat his views on this: did he though of a model of
governance, or did he simply convene stakeholders in order to have
governments back in the discussion? Most of all content published regarding
multistakeholderism is directly linked to neo-liberal organization such as the
WEF, or to partisans of the current system of governance of the Internet.
Neutral and independent academics work is still to be conducted to establish
the fundaments and reality of that “model of governance”.
_1.3 : The need for the “Siren Servers” - as Jaron Lanier labels them - to
maintain their constant growing benefits, technical supremacy and expertise
at all level, would it be architecture, software, infrastructure, encryption, IP
development, rooting, marketing services, advertising services, lobbying,
metadata mining, monetization, is also a challenge to any alternative
thinking. What works for the “Siren Servers” is often what the big players
impose to smaller players or simple users to preserve competitive advance
and advantage, and their monopolistic position.
_1.4 : The unachieved objective set by the Tunis agenda to “re-embed”
governments in the system of governance of the Internet at a global level,
and not just over their respective national law space, when it comes to public
policy making (infrastructure development, transnational agreements and
liberalization, social benefits and empowerment, social justice to all citizens,
collecting due tax, regulating unfair competition, avoiding concentration and
abuse, protection of rights and laws) is a source of tension at the international
level. The Tunis agenda has called for each stakeholder role to be recognized,
including civil society and users. With already 10 years gone with the wind,
the UN WSIS process has to either die or come to rebirth. With the strong
opposition of the current tenants of the internet economic system, the
narrative has gone out of control, characterizing the UN or governments as a
danger, a risk or a threat to the so-called “ungoverned, ungovernable
Internet”. It is hardly conceivable that governments, in particular those of
Democratic extraction, or the UN are to be considered as negative forces
ready to refrain or destroy the Internet wonder. Refusing to consider the
potential dangers of cyber-crime and cyber-war would be irresponsible as
well. All of that is fueling critics against the current system of governance, if
one might call it a system.
_1.5 : Today’s asymmetric governance in the Internet space is also amplified
by the difficulty of a majority of citizens in the world with no, limited or
expensive access to the Internet to be heard, or only through the channel of
civil society entities, having themselves limited funds to bring their case and
cause to the general acknowledgement, and therefore raising more and more
voices from that corner of the world. In addition to that, most of the main
stream media are so far no following seriously the Internet governance issue
and debate, leaving it to a small group of “usual suspects”.
_ 1.6 : Mass surveillance, in particular by one major democratic country, also a
leading force in the field of Internet technology, and online and offline
services, shocked many global citizens and their representatives over the
planet, bringing many to question the sincerity of a government that
champions Freedom of expression, flagging it as a constant inspiration to
conduct its international policy making, and obviously consistent with the
defense of its legitimate interest. But as Internet belongs and participates to
the creation of global politics, such a pro-domo behavior looks rather selfish,
on top of full infringement of citizen rights.
_ 1.7 : Funding of investment to support infrastructure development and
digital empowerment around the world is a constant source of conflict
between most non US telecom operators and their US counterparts, digital
service providers, and US authorities. This is adding to the asymmetry
condemned by many. It is also obvious that the infrastructure gap is of high
concern in terms of justice between developed and developing countries.
_ 1.8 : Multistakeholderism could help each participant to come to a better
understanding. Reality is that this mehtodology has now driven the Internet
Governance debate in a dead end, polarizing parties and not being able to
define a common language. Many supporters of the Multistakeholder
approach have opposed the creation of common definitions, although a very
necessary step to have any fruitful dialogue.
It is fair to salute all of those who made the Internet what it is today. Still
Internet cannot prosper and impact societies any further without facing a
crisis, if the global community of users, players and policy makers does not
recognized that Internet governance is not anymore a simple technical
challenge allowing both business to prosper, and military and police forces to
act under their respective governmental will with no respect to global citizens
rights and treaties of mutual cooperation and peace between nations. It would
not even be fair to respond to President Rousseff call in front of all nations, in
September 2013, by focusing a Brazilian multistakeholder meeting about
Internet Governance, over the single issue of an internationalization of ICANN
and IANA. ICANN is himself a co-organizer of that meeting, according to its
own website indications. To ask ICANN to reset by itself its own relation to the
US government and to IANA function– indeed a critical issue to all encryption
certifications (data-mining of algorithmic keys)- would be more or less like
asking the US to think for the US how to best reset the US asymmetric role.
For 10 years this option brought no result.
Due to the magnitude of its transformative ability to change our societies in
all of its aspects, we have to recognize that the Internet has now to face its
political endeavor, its global commons aspects and its obligation to rely on
various public policy arrangements, in the name of public interest, as global
and as consensual could they be. Internet has definitely step a foot into the
world of Global Commons, as it brings social justice challenges at the forefront
of a globalized world. This implies a coordinated effort at a public policy and
political level in a true democratic fashion, in order to deliver sustainable
benefits to all citizens, protecting their rights, and still making sure that
technological innovation keeps flooding the interconnectivity of more
networks, more root zones and more citizens. It cannot be accepted that in
terms of public policy making, the “equal footing” championed by the
multistakeholder approach could imply that the voice of a state equates the
voice of a corporation, be it a successful one making billion of profits - larger
than the GDP of that many states - without paying its due tax to the
communities that contribute to the private benefit of a its shareholders.
The asymmetric governance of the Internet cannot survive in its current form.
Global Geneva’s contribution is opting for a full new grand design that will
allow Internet principles to be fully understood and implemented, and not just
adapted to an evolution of what is currently the limited and asymmetric form
of the Internet governance eco-system. New thinking is the key word. Let’s be
innovative and disruptive.
2_A new system of governance for the
Internet
We are of the opinion that there are three levels of understanding to further
articulate the next system of governance related to the Internet, and its many
issues and challenges:
- A: intergovernmental level, (binding agreements, national and
international public regulation, international law)
- B: global citizens level, (Internet principles, consensus, best
practices, empowerment, fair competition, innovation, capacity building)
- C: arbitrage and justice level (unlocking deadlocks, dispute
settlement and court decision).
_2.1 : Intergovernmental level
Establishment of a World Internet Organization (WIO) able to legitimize
common public policies, regulations and standards related to interconnectivity
issues. Some of them could be of ‘soft power’ essence – commonly accepted
but recognized by treaties -, some of ‘hard power’ – new regulations or new
policies. WIO would have full legitimacy, with the largest constituency among
States, their signatures duly apposed to each other. WIO would be part, and
contributive to, the international law and policy making framework. Each
opportunity to vote by WIO constituency (governments) could be vetoed once,
and only once, by the WIF (see below). In the latter case, a new round of
discussions and negotiations should take place.
The WIO executive board would have a mandate to bring initiative and
suggest reforms for approval and implementation by its constituencies, and
would have to forward, document and submit any suggestion approved by the
WIF (see below) on both the Internet public policy level, WIO bylaws or
Internet governance level. To enter the Internet governance law framework,
all of these suggestions would be approved by the WIO constituency, with a
75% majority, if not vetoed by the WIF (see below), or after a second round of
negotiations within WIO, if primarily vetoed. WIO would not enter daily
operations of the Internet governance. Still it would be the referring authority
to IANA, due to its role with regard to DNS/root zone management, encryption
and IPs. It cannot be that an entity responsible for such critical functions could
be regulated, or place under an authority supposed to be regulated or having
just a technical perspective; putting IANA under the control of TLD registries
and root servers operators sounds even more dangerous. IANA functions
would be handled in a independent fashion.
Thinking of innovation, would it be more than one root zone, the WIF, and not
WIO, would create a board to oversight their setting, ruling, and interconnectivity
in full transparency and independence. Once set, this board
would be handled and managed with the same precaution as for IANA, under
WIO authority but not under its direct handling. The check and balance would
still be into the WIF’s hands.
WIO would be the right entity to handle tax avoidance issues.
_2.2: Global citizens level
Establishment of a World Internet Forum (WIF) able to defend values,
(see Internet Charter or Internet Principles), public concerns and support a
just, capable and thriving interconnected space. The WIF would be the venue
for a permanent dialogue between global citizens and all players in the field
starting with accredited civil society representatives. The WIF would suggest
and promote ideas, programs, policies (to WIO and governments), working in
close relation with the other UN entities from Human Rights to Climate
Change, Environment, Development, Trade, Intellectual Property to fund and
support approved initiatives by the WIF. The WIF would be the ‘natural’ entity
able to deliver empowerment and capacity building to any stakeholder, in
particular to public authorities and public servants expressing such a need.
The WIF would also be able to update the Charter if needed.
ICANN would be able to pursue its role for collective service fees, edit new
TLDs, under the supervision of the WIF. I would not handle global public policy
matters.
Regulatory proposal to WIO or initiative driven by grouping international
entities (public private partnership, public or private) should be endorsed by a
75% majority of the forum constituencies. No unanimity would be required. No
veto would be allowed to one single governments – no Security council here!
The dialogue within the forum would be of multistakeholder essence, but
profit-oriented participants would be excluded from voting with respect to
regulatory proposal to WIO and changes to the Internet Charter – no doubt,
the for profit participants would keep their capacity to express their view,
thanks to their powerful means.
The exact setting of the WIF constituency would be discussed thoroughly
during the preparatory period (see roadmap).
The WIF would be part of the UN system, but its constituencies would not be
governments (see WIO), but global citizens and civil society recognized
players of the field. All continents should be equally represented.
When values would be at stake, the WIF would address an official request to
the entity, government or stakeholder responsible for not respecting the
Internet Charter. This could lead to a resolution by the UN, and possible
sanctions.
The location of IANA at WIO, and ICANN at the WIF, have probably to do with
the fact that ICANN should be assimilated to a domain development and
service entity when it comes to domain name. IANA would be the technical,
safety and security entity. IANA should have a special link/status/contract with
WIO in order to avoid un-wanted interferences from governments. A 75%
majority at WIO would be requested to act/modify/contest a IANA decision,
making it difficult for governments to go beyond reasonable and consensual
demands. Again the WIF could veto a potential decision by WIO, once.
Among the WIF constituencies, there should be room for an online/remote
participation of global users and global citizens. A citizen initiative should be
considered, if able to embrace 5 continents, and criteria to be define during
the preparatory process (see roadmap) in order to suggest program or
regulation at the WIF level, then possibly at WIO level. The preparatory work
(see roadmap) should take this into account, so that for the very first time
citizens would have a chance to voice directly their concern. The digital
wonder of today allows the lawmakers to think of this democratic and
inclusive process to be part of the new Internet Governance eco-system. Such
an initiative could not be vetoed and the WIF would have to finalize a
proposal/initiative.
_2.3 Arbitrage and justice level to address deadlocks and disputes.
Establishment of a double system of arbitrage/settlement and
justice/constraint, taking into account the positive lessons from WTO and
WIPO. The arbitrage operandi would be placed under WIF scrutiny, in a
transparent, accountable and responsible fashion. If no arbitrage/settlement
could be concluded at the WIF by a specific board, the case would be brought
to the appreciation of the court of justice, seated at WIO.
The WIF board of settlement could be called in on issues/conflict related to
actions by stakeholders.
Action against the WIF could be taken to WIO.
As the UN system offers many different models of governance – see ILO, WTO,
ISO, WIPO, UNDP, UNEP… - it offers a lot of opportunity to adapt any
governance to the specifics of any major field of concerns. The UN system is
flexible enough to envision a new system of governance, taking the lessons of
other systems of governance, and considering the specifics of the Internet.
The UN system can bring legitimacy to new entities or mandates, having to
combine both international binding agreements and treaties with efficiency
and a required speed to cop with the extension of the Internet space, impact
and outcomes.
3_An innovation in international
governance of the Internet could impact
many other field of interests.
Since 1945, after a year of preparation and 4 months of intensive discussions
in San Francisco, the UN Charter was signed by 50 future member states on
June 26, the UN being installed on October 24, the same year. A fascinating
new governance product of the largest war ever, the second world war, a
globalized one. As an innovative political space, the UN even though it has
been often criticized has face many new challenges and ‘invented’ many
innovative entities and programs, related to both immediate and long term
issues. One major innovation within the Internet new system of governance
would be the fact that WIO and WIF would both have strong capacities to act,
but would also be linked through a check and balance relation. As the WIF
would be the “guardian” of a charter/framework of the Internet principles, it
would be legitimate to censor an agreement at WIO level, which would not be
in agreement with the Internet charter. A WIF veto would oblige any such
agreement at WIO level to go through one additional round of negotiations.
One possible option would be having the WIF as a member of WIO, the only
one with no voting rights, but a veto rights on first round. A second
negotiation would have to be conducted, in a fair understanding that the
same proposal could not be run again without some serious amendments. An
opposition between the WIF and WIO would lead to a major crisis which makes
this new system of governance interesting if citizens and leaders wish to keep
it aloft.
Any dispute against WIO should be taken to the UN general secretariat.
4_Funding of the new system of
governance for the Internet
4_1: WIO would be funded by its constituencies.
4_2: The WIF would be funded for its most part by service charges for Internet
unique identifiers (domain naming – extension) collected globally by ICANN,
and in addition, specifically by ISOC/PIR for .net, .org, .com, .ngo.... That
supposed that the ISOC/PIR capacities would be transferred to the WIF. ISOC
being a community based organization would, like any other civil society
organization, have to fund itself within its membership, or any other
appropriate system. The PIR expertise and staff could be incorporated as a
WIF department, but at reasonable cost. Such a funding for the WIF would be
more or less similar to the way WIPO is getting the majority of its funding.
4_3: The work over Internet Charter would be secure by the UN.
It seems consistent to think that the WIF will require more budget support
than WIO, which needs a secretariat but a rather small staff.
5_Roadmap for implementing the new
system of governance for the Internet
Democracies and members of the United Nations are now facing the major
challenges. As NetMundial will come to a conclusion on April 26, 2014, the
Brazilian government should call for the UN to launch the following process,
and suggest to help and participate in the preparation and Sao Paolo followups
with a few other major governmental partners (Germany, France, Saudi
Arabia, India, China, South Africa and the US). In 1944 and 1945, 4 countries
prepared the draft of a UN Charter (China, United Kingdom, the Soviet Union
and the United States) after representatives of 26 countries pledged their
Governments to continue fighting together the Axis Powers on January 1st,
1942, when the term ‘United Nations’ was first used by Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Such a call to the United Nations, following Brazilian president speech in front
of the UN General Assembly and the Sao Paulo meeting would show obvious
and strong consistency at both local and international level by the Brazilian
head of State following the Brazilian conference. The call would require to:
_5.1 : Set a process to finalize an “Internet Charter” by convening civil society,
users and their representatives, the technical and researching community,
and governmental and UN delegations in limited number. Many interesting
contribution are already there to start with, including the Just Net Coalition
Principles. No corporations or business associations should directly participate
to establishing that Charter - they already have enough power to voice their
views and try to influence the writers of such an Internet Charter.
_5.2 : Set a common process to precisely define the two new bodies (WIO &
WIF), their linkage, including check and balance between them, transparency
and accountability, and their common adequate roadmap. The US will have to
accommodate these requests, in order to end the asymmetric governance
and market dominance of the Internet. This will take away the risks that the
Internet is facing today. A non digital war treaty ratification should be a
natural complementary objective to that process through the WCIT/ITRs
channel. A Cyber war non proliferation treaty would be welcome.
_5.3 - Set a technical advisory group to best assess the core functions of the
Internet, and see how to adequately transform them, or not, and how and
where to position them in the framework of a WIO –WIF system. This process
would be supported by a neutral group of engineers able to assist and advice
the first two process in their reflection and capacities at a technical level.
Clear criteria are needed to select the participants.
_5.4 – Such a global project needs leadership, under the neutral oversight
and arbitrage of the UN general secretariat. A special appointment is
necessary to have a high level diplomat or a former foreign affair minister, a
former prime minister, or a personality of undisputable command, a
man/woman of high reputation able to handle that process with the support of
a small group of special assistants. He/she would have the support of a small
multistakeholder advisory board to help him/her cope with the spirit of the
overall process (WIF_WIO) and philosophy.
It seems reasonable to think that 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 could be achieved over a 1-
year time frame, paving the way to another 6 months to found, fund and
constitute the proposed entities and system of arbitrage and justice, and do
the switch from the old system. Until then, the current system would basically
be stable.
[1] Strategic Management : A stakeholder approach by R. Edward
Freeman, 1984, Boston, Pitman.
[2] Stakeholder Theory and Organizational Ethics by R. Phillips, 2003,
Berret-Koehler Publishers